TELETYPE MODEL 33 ASR

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The contents of this project are published under the MIT license, let me know what you do with it!

TELETYPE MODEL 33 ASR
The Teletype Model 33 was a very successful computer terminal in the late 1960s and 1970s. It has an important historical role in several innovations, including the ASCII character set and the development of Unix and BASIC.

Some Background: ASCII, Unix and the ASR33
The history of the teletypewriter – mechanical devices for digital communication – spans from early electrical communications to global news and messaging networks.
In the early 1960s, teletypewriters proved to be an ideal interface for the first time-sharing computer systems such as CTSS. People side-by-side or in different locations, each operating a terminal, could simultaneously work at the same computer, coordinate their activities, and even communicate with each other! Increasingly, the larger general-purpose computers became connected by networks too.
With the affordable Model 33 Teletype, interactive terminals became the standard UI for minicomputers such as the DEC PDP-7, PDP-8 and PDP-11, and as consoles for the first generation of personal computers including the Altair 8800.
[teletype sharing] [kids these days]
Hard-copy (printing) terminals were superseded in the 70s by the "glass TTY" (DataPoint 3300, ADM-3A, VT-05 and many more) and increasingly smart video terminals that had nice fonts, even color and graphics. These had obvious advantages in flexibility (particularly for text editors), performance, convenience and eventually in cost. So the Teletype machinery became obsolete, but its data formats (8-bit serial data, ASCII text) and the central expectations of what a terminal could do (interactive input and output) are still baked into every modern operating system. In this sense the Teletype is "compatible". PC-compatible, Linux-compatible, Android-compatible, Internet-compatible, because it's the foundational interactive Input/Output device.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


WHAT IS A TELETYPE TERMINAL?
The Teletype Model 33 is an electromechanical computer terminal, with a serial current-loop interface.

Terminal
A terminal consists of DATA INPUT and DATA DISPLAY, connected to a computer system. The teletype has a keyboard for input, and a printer for display. The printer prints 72 characters per line on continuous-roll paper, and includes a bell (so that a typist can tell when nearing the end of a line, but also for notification).
[paper and tape]
oops, no word-wrap

Paper Tape
In the "ASR" (Automatic Send-Receive) Teletype models there are two additional I/O devices: a paper-tape reader for input, and a paper-tape punch (reperforator) for output. Punched paper tape is a great way to store and communicate data, although it's limited in density (10 characters per inch, or 2.66 kilometers per megabyte), slow (the Teletype can read/write at 10 bytes per second, 29 hours per megabyte), and tears quite easily.
For example, here's what the HP2000/ACCESS BASIC manual has to say: use tape to store your programs if you don't need them very often:
[punch command]
The reader is mechanical, which is pretty cool. I don't understand it yet.
[tape]
8-level paper tape (here showing ASCII with no parity, so the 8th bit is unset)

ASCII
The keyboard and printer use ASCII, which is a 7-bit character encoding standardized in 1963, with numbers, upper-case letters (no lowercase!), punctuation, and several control characters. (Some of the punctuation is unusual).
An eighth data bit can be used for parity, depending on the exact model of Teletype keyboard.
The tape punch and reader use all 8 bits, so can be used to read and store binary data (bytes).
[ASCII printed by teletype] [ASCII documentation]
Pretty typewheel, and comprehensive man pages (in the three-ring binder)
Serial Data Mechanism
The data connection is a serial current loop. There are two independent current loops, one for "send" and another for "receive". They are quite reliable over moderate distances (up to several kilometers), which is handy when your nearest computer is a long way away.
On the "send" (keyboard and tape reader), the teletype doesn't have any electronics! The 8-bit parallel connections go to a distributor with a rotating brush (driven by a motor and clutch) that make or break the current loop for each bit in turn. It's quite complicated and completely mechanical, but well-documented. The keyboard "latches", when a key is pressed it stays down (making the wires connect for each bit), until the distributor has rotated to send the bits down the wire. Then the next key can be pressed, and then latched until sent, and so on.
On the "receive" side (printer and tape punch), the serial current loop is distributed to a set of solenoids that lift codebars to move the print head and punch pins. There's some electronics here: a simple solid-state amplifier from the 20mA loop to 500mA to drive the solenoids. Again, the mechanics are quite complicated, with the print head rotating for each incoming character, and also the carriage moving forward, and the "CR" code (carriage return) triggering the release of the spring that returns it. Oil is required, and accounts for the vintage smell. Its vintage sound is quite something, too.
PCs generally used the RS-232 serial interface standard, which is based on voltage rather than current. But this has itself been superseded by USB.
[Serial data]
The Model 33's data format – 1 start bit, 8 data bits and 2 stop bits – is simple, but obsolete. By USB standards, a teletype is ridiculously slow; very few hardware interfaces (UARTs) can be found nowadays that will connect at the blazing speed of 10 characters per second (110 bits per second). They're all in the megabit, gigabit, whatever. But my speed is slow enough to simulate, even if the hardware has left us behind.


THIS PROJECT
In the early 1980s, I was lucky to attend a high-school that had a Teletype connected to the PR1ME cluster at the University of Surrey. As user SCH008, this was my early gateway to the world of networked computers. It's amazingly fun to revisit some of those experiences. I've worked in DOS, Windows, OS/2, linux, macOS, iOS, Android, and more besides, and it looks like little Linux machines are everywhere.
Whether in your hand or in cloud, modern machines are exponentially larger and faster than in those days. But although the Teletype hardware and original Unix software have been superseded by 50 years' of layered improvement, the hard-copy Model 33 terminal is still the canonical /dev/tty.
So, is a teletypewriter terminal still USABLE, or even USEFUL, today?

Exploring the Hardware User Interface
This project is an ongoing exploration of how to connect its descendents' operators to the Internet. How to use the Teletype interactively, for real, as a terminal to modern networks and computers and everything they can do. What that tactile experience is like for the people and groups that play with it (noisily in the room). The command-line shell is waiting (mostly bash, not Primos CPL), more powerful than ever, and its rails were built for these wheels. I don't think it'll go out of date just yet.
In this repo you'll find documentation of software and hardware in the process, with tools, mostly Unix-ish software in Python for the Raspberry Pi. This involves making the Unix commandline and essential software usable with a hard-copy terminal where "carriage return" takes hundreds of milliseconds, with no scroll-back, no "erase" or "clear", no back-space, no lower-case, no color, no graphics, and no cursor. But the paper printout and the punched tape are pretty useful, and tactile, and (yup) fun.
There's information about the physical machine and the electronic connection (current-loop serial to USB). The way I approached this uses an Arduino microcontroller to handle the slow serial data stream and make the terminal appear halfway "modern" (mostly things that have just become obsolete and removed from stty: delays for the hardware carriage return and line feed, converting to lower case) and even "smart" (ANSI escape codes that can be used by Unix apps). I think that's the best way today; the Teensy processor is just right for this job.
With USB the terminal can connect to just about anything, including a PC or a Mac or a phone, but my main setup is with a Raspberry Pi built into the pedestal. This runs debian linux (raspbian stretch), and it's a great platform for working on an archaic terminal. It can boot up and get to the login prompt, and log in just automatically, with getty. That sets up the stty (nothing much to do, there) and the way escape codes are handled (terminfo). The escape codes are pretty involved, I guess, and need more doc than the source code.
The operator is in a room with others, and should certainly be playing with the terminal's distinctive hardware capabilities, as well as the things it can connect to. * Connecting to today's information utilities, with apps and notifications, * Connecting to vintage systems and simulations, * Lots of fun with printing and paper tape. Ribbons, streamers, patterns, bookmarks, greetings cards, framed pictures, the works. If you want me to print something and send it to you, there's an Etsy store!. Not much there yet, but talk to me on Twitter and whatever. It'll get more structured eventually.
[teletype ASR33 on pedestal]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I'm indebted to Wayne Durkee for bringing this machine back to life; Dave Tumey for recreated parts; to many Greenkeys list members and others for their inspiration and vast expertise. And my wife plays along and indulges this stuff, for which I'm very happy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

TELETYPE 
Teletype Corporation commemorated its Golden Anniversary in 1957. Fifty years is a short span in the history of Communication. Yet in that time, Teletype has developed its equipment from primitive models with limited use or acceptance, to the speedy precision machines which are an indispensable part of modem communications. Today Teletype equipment is an important economic tool, serving in many and varied ways the demands of our way of life. 
This is the story of Teletype. It is a story of challenges met and problems solved, of faith in the future and of the surpassing of what were only dreams. 

TOM-TOM TO TAPE 
Tom-toms, church bells, smoke signals, the Dead Sea Scrolls, and the Pony Express - these are all milestones in the endless effort to bridge time and distance by improving communications. 
Until the 19th century the only reliable way to deliver a message was hand-to-hand or face-to-face. The fate of nations often hung on the arrival of a lathered horse and his spent rider. A thousand men died at the Battle of New Orleans because news of a peace treaty signed weeks earlier had not reached the opposing armies. 
It was the harnessing of electricity that almost overnight catapulted communications into the modem epoch. With the sending of the first telegraph message by inventor Samuel F.B. Morse in 1844, both tine and distance were conquered with a single instmment. 
But early telegraphic communication, amazing as it was, had its drawbacks. Rigorous training was needed for operators to acquire skill in transmitting and receiving Morse code. 
And it took two operators to get a telegram over the wires - the sender the Morse key to translate the message into dots and dashes, and another operator at the receiving and to listen for the code on the Morse sounder and write out the telegram by hand or on a typewriter. 
What telegraphy needed was a system whereby the messages could be received automatically in the form of typewritten or “printed” alphabet characters instead of a series of audible dots and dashes. 
An early attempt was the invention of Royal E. House of Vermont, patented in 1848. it has a piano style keyboard and used compressed air to actuate the mechanism, which employed a typewheel and printed on a tape.In 1855 David Hughes introduced an improved machine built along similar lines. A significant development occurred in 1874 when a Frenchman, Emil Baudot, worked out a system of printing telegraphy using a five-unit selecting code. 

Original organizers of Morkrum Company were Joy Morton; his son Sterling, who was later to head the company; Mark Morton; Charles L. Krum and his son Howard; and Daniel Peterkin, who was Joy Morton's secretary. 

TELETYPE BEGINS 
The story began in 1902 when a young electrical engineer named Frank Peame arrived in Chicago with a letter of introduction to Joy Morton, head of the Morton Salt interests. Peame, who had been experimenting with a printing telegraph  system, wanted financial help so he could keep working. 
Morton talked it over with his friend Charles L. Krum, a distinguished mechanical engineer and vice president of the Western Cold Storage Company, operated by Joy Morton's brother, Mark. The verdict for Peame was favorable, and a laboratory was set up for hire in the attic of the cold storage company. 
After about a year of unsuccessful experiments Peame lost interest and decided to go into the teaching field. Krum continued the work and by 1906 had developed a promising model. In that year his son, Howard, a newly graduated electrical engineer, plunged into the work alongside his father. 
Experiment succeeded experiment, with many moments of doubt. But, overall, progress was encouraging, and finally the Morkrum Company -named for Morton and Krum, and later to be re-named Teletype Corporation-was incorporated on October 5, 1907, with a capital of $150,000. 
THE FIRST TEST. By 1908 a working model was made which looked good enough to test on an actual telegraph line. The printing portion was a modified Oliver typewriter, mounted on a desk with the necessary relays, contacts, magnets, and interconnecting wires. 
Joy Morton, who was a director of the Chicago and Alton Railroad, arranged for a trial on the railroad's wires between Chicago and Bloomington, a span of about 150 miles. The test of the experimental printer was highly promising and Charles and Howard Krum went back to work, making more models and improving them, seeking to develop a small neat, direct keyboard typewheel printer. 
This was a period of basic invention and experimentation with printing telegraph. Western handling part of its traffic with the Barclay system; the Hughes and Baudot systems used abroad, and there were many others. 
Each system had advantages, disadvantages, imperfections. In general, they were apt to be extremely delicate, overly complicated, and too expensive in manufacturing cost and maintenance to be practical. The most serious problem was maintaining synchronism between the sending machine and the remote printer. If the distant unit was “off;” it would receive the signals in improper sequence and print gibberish. For reliable transmission, the sending and receiving units had to be “in step” with each other-and the synchronism had to be maintained throughout transmission. 
It remained for this problem to be solved before the printing telegraph concept could take giant steps in the communication world. 

HOW A MESSAGE IS SENT BY ELECTRICAL PULSES 
When the contact in the signal line is closed, current flows and the line is said to be "marking". A MARKING PULSE is generated when the contact is held closed for a fixed length of time.
When the contact is opened, no current can flow and the line is said to be "spacing". A SPACING PULSE is generated when the contact is held open for a fixed length of time. 
Each character consists of five electrical pulses which may be either marking or spacing. Black indicates a marking pulse, white a spacing pulse.
Using the letter "D" as an example, pulses one and four are marking while pulses two, three, and five are spacing. 
In addition to the code pulses, (which transmit the message) each combination is preceded by a start pulse (always spacing) and followed by a stop pulse (always marking). 

TECHNICAL TRIUMPHS 
Among Howard Krum's many contributions to printing telegraphy, one of the most significant was his solution for the problem of synchronizing sending and receiving units. 
A brief look at how Teletype equipment works is helpful in understanding his accomplishment. 
Teletype machines operate by the transmission of electrical “pulses” over wires from a sending unit to a receiving unit. The sending unit creates the pulses by mechanical action following the pressing of typewriter-like keys. The receiving unit converts the pulses back into mechanical action, producing typed letters or figures. The electrical “pulse” can best be described as a brief electric flash, or flow of current, stopped or started at will. The illustration on this page graphically explains this action. 
With the Morse telegraph, the operator who receives listens to a series of unequal dot-dashes which constitute a code, and theft translates them into the written word. Teletype machines “listen” to a code in which each letter or number is made by a combination of electrical pulses of equal length and automatically translate this code into printing. But the receiving machine must be “listening” in unison with the sending machine. 
Howard Krum's idea for keeping sending and receiving machines together was to add a “start” pulse before each code combination, and a “stop” pulse after each code combination. This provided a fresh start and a “correction” period for each character and made it comparatively simple to keep the sending and receiving machines in step for the fraction of a second required to transmit a character code combination. Thus full synchronization was achieved. 

FIRST SALE. A significant milestone in the young company's life-its first commercial sale-occurred in 1910. In that year the Postal Telegraph System - since merged with the Western Union but then the second largest telegraph company in the country - authorized Morkrum to make an installation on its lines between New York and Boston. Postal Telegraph had been concerned as to whether the Morkrum system would function on ordinary telegraph lines in good and bad weather. The installation proved most successful. Two years later Postal had eight Morkrum circuits, averaging 300 miles in length, the longest being the 1,000 mile New York to Chicago line. 
In 1912 Western Union became a customer, and by the middle of that year had six circuits in operation. Equipment was so improved by this time that there is a record of 1,207 messages exchanged in one nine-hour day, and an instance of an operator sending 104 messages in one hour between Boston and New York. 
About this time the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy installed Morkrum printers between Chicago and Galesburg, Illinois. This was soon followed by installations for the Rock Island, New York Central, Lake Shore, B. & O., and the Canadian Pacific. 

SPEEDING THE NEWS 
In 1914 the Associated Press became seriously concerned about its method of distributing news to its member newspapers in the Now York area. Dispatches went out by pneumatic tube and messenger boy, and by Morse telegraph to the larger papers which could afford receiving operators. There was much dissatisfaction because news got to some papers faster than it did to others. 
The problem was turned over to Kent Cooper, a young man in A P's Chicago office destined later to become general manager of the press association. Cooper called in Howard Krum and discussed with him the possibility of using the Morkrum printing telegraph for press service. 
By that time, Morkrum had a tape perforator, already in use in commercial telegraph service. To meet the exacting press needs, the men decided that the best method would be automatic transmission from punched paper tape for the steady stream of regular dispatches, with provision for interruption by news flashes to he sent by direct keyboard transmission from a Morkrgm printer. The individual newspapers would have Morkrum page printers and receive the dispatches on roll paper. 
With the perforator, the news could be punched into tape at very high speed, since this instrument was not connected to the telegraph line. The tape was then fed into a transmitter, which sent the signals over the telegraph line automatically. This arrangement made for higher over all speed and much greater efficiency, 
A trial of the setup proved a resounding success. News dispatches reached all AP papers in the New York area simultaneously and much faster than had previously been possible. Other press associations quickly adopted printing telegraphy. Today the Associated Press, United Press and International News Service operate thousands of Teletype machines, disseminating millions of words of news daily throughout the world. 

The outbreak of World War I and subsequent entry of the United States led to a shortage of skilled Morse telegraphers for civilian needs. 
The result was to focus attention on printing telegraphy. A trade journal of those days remarked, "With this system it is not necessary for the operator to understand the Morse code, as anyone who can operate a typewriter keyboard can do the work. The system also greatly increases the capacity of the telegraph lines". 
During this period the Pennsylvania Railroad undertook an extensive program of replacing Morse circuits with Morkrum equipment. The Union Pacific also installed equipment, followed by others, and commercial telegraph and press circuits were extended. 
An unusual application for those times was the setup developed in 1917 for Carson Pirie Scott & Company, one of Chicago's great department stores, linking its warehouse and wholesale departments. The system immediately proved to be a great time saver. 
That year, Sterling Morton became active in the company, assuming the presidency and directing sales. 
By 1918 the young company had grown to the point where it could think of a plant of its own in place of rented quarters. A survey showed that a majority of the 200 employees by then on the rolls would be best served by a location on the north side of Chicago. Accordingly a site was selected on Wrightwood and Southport Avenues, and a building with an area of 35,000 square feet was constructed. The first payroll in the company's new home was figured out on Thanksgiving Day. 
About this time, also, the company embarked on a diversification program to fill the gaps between orders for printing telegraph machines. Various items were manufactured, in eluding penny pencil sharpeners, wire braid removers, an air gauge for tires, a patented lock for automobiles with an “unpickable” combination, and a check handling machine marketed under the name of the “National Check Endorser:” 

To make even better headway financially, a change was also made in the method of marketing Morkrum equipment. Up to this time most of the Morkrum machines in the field were being leased to customers on a monthly rental basis. This policy was now abandoned in favor of outright sale. 
Research and development, always the lifeblood of the business, proceeded at a swift pace. The Model 11, a compact machine operating at 40 words per minute and using a typewheel to print on paper tape (somewhat like a stock ticker) was introduced for light duty service. It was to this machine, incidentally, that the name “Teletype” was first applied, and it was in the company's sales literature on this unit that the Teletype scroll symbol, selected through an employee contest, was first used. The year was 1921. 
One of the earliest installations of the Model 11 was in the Congress Hotel in Chicago in 1922, permitting registration, departure, billing, and other information to be transmitted simultaneously to various departments in the hotel. 
Next to come along was the Model 12. This page printer with typebars like a typewriter, was the first Morkrum machine to be used extensively by general business firms, in private wire service. It was also quickly adopted by the press associations, and for many years “delivered” practically all the press wire news in the United States and Canada. Its construction was so rugged that the first installation - a network of 37 printers put in for the Chicago Police Department in 1922 - did not require replacement until 1956. In all, 12,000 Model 12's were sold, two as recently as 1943.
About this time Morkrum began to experiment with radio transmission of printing telegraph signals, a pioneering effort which was to pay huge dividends in World War II. 
Printed messages were sent by “wireless” in 1923 from the transmitting tower at the Wrightwood Avenue plant to the home of Sterling Morton in Lisle, Illinois, some 30 miles away. That same year test messages were sent from Chicago to Milwaukee, Wisconsin and Lafayette, Indiana. 
In 1924, the telegraph companies began to turn their attention to the use of printers on their tributary circuits, as well as the pick-up and delivery wires between their main office and branch and customers' offices. For this service they wanted a heavy-duty tape printer. With tape printers it is not necessary to return a carriage or start a new line. Telegraph line time is conserved and the machines themselves are simpler and less expensive. 
Morkrum thereupon developed the Model 14, a typebar tape printer so simple and sturdy it could be installed in the most remote telegraph office with only rare visits from the maintenance man. This machine, introduced in 1925, was the first printer to be almost wholly mechanical. Messages were (and in many telegraph offices still are) printed on gummed 3/8" paper tape, which the operator pasted onto the familiar telegraph blanks. 
MERGER - AND A NEW NAME - During these years of the Morkrum Company's growth and development the Kleinschmidt Electric Company, formed by inventor Edward K. Kleinschmidt in New York, was also manufacturing printing telegraph instruments and serving some of the same customers, particularly the telegraph companies. 
In 1924 a patent conflict developed between the two firms. This led to a meeting between Sterling Morton and Charles B. Goodspeed, who was associated with Kleinschmidt Electric. Out of their session came a six-line memorandum which became the basis for a merger creating the Morkrum-Kleinschmidt Corporation, with Sterling Morton as president and Edward Kleinschmidt and Howard Krum as vice presidents. The Wrightwood plant was enlarged, and the new company embarked on a period of phenomenal growth. 
1925 saw the establishment of the company's Development & Research Department, complete with its own model shop and testing laboratories. It was soon engaged in a variety of new projects, including an improved page printer, a fire alarm system, a method of setting type by wire in newspaper and printing plants, and a transmission system for automatic stock quotation display boards. 
The Teletype School of Maintenance Training was also established during this period. The school offers tuition-free classes of several weeks' duration in which customers enroll their personnel for instruction in the operating theory, adjustments, and maintenance of the various Teletype apparatus units. Classes are held on a regular schedule throughout the year. 
As the '20s drew to a close, trading on the New York Stock Exchange became so heavy that the old stock tickers, running at about 200 characters a minute, were unable to keep up with the volume. Teletype developed a high speed stock ticker, operating at 500 characters a minute. One of the interesting features of this machine is that it employs a six-unit code for the purpose of saving the operators at the Exchange transmission headquarters the time required for operating the shift keys. The sixth pulse was added to characters in the “Figures” position and acts as an automatic shift. 
The ticker was introduced in 1928, and was soon placed in service in the offices of hundreds of their clients in the United States and Canada by Western Union and the New York Quotation Company. 
In December, 1928, the company’s name was changed for the sake of simplicity from Morkrum-Kleinschmidt Corporation to Teletype Corporation. Thus its equipment trademark also became its corporate name. 
By the end of 1929 Wrightwood headquarters covered 280,000 square feet of floor space in twelve buildings, eight times the space occupied just five years before, and employment had risen to 2,400. Production figures revealed that a revolution had taken place in communications. From 1918 to 1927, 15,500 Teletype instruments were made. In 1928 alone, 12,700 instruments were produced, and 1929 production reached 25,200 for the one year. And these instruments were in service not only in the United States and Canada but also in many countries abroad. 

THROUGH THE THIRTIES 
1930 marks another important milestone in the company's history. In that year, the Teletype Corporation was purchased by the American Telephone and Telegraph Company and became a subsidiary of the Western Electric Company. Sterling Morton, who had been president of the company since 1917, retired from the scene, as did Edward Kleinschmidt, who had been a vice president since the merger in 1924. Howard Krum stayed on for some years as a consultant, guiding the company's development and research program. 
For some years prior to its acquisition of Teletype, Western Electric had itself been a manufacturer of teletypewriter equipment, making apparatus of its own design. Gradually, however, the company withdrew from the field and Teletype, as a specialist, supplied more and more of the equipment needed by the Bell System for private wire service to business firms. 
While the Bell System used the Model 12, they indicated a desire for additional features that would be an advantage in private wire service. The Model 15, placed in volume production in 1930, incorporated these features and many others. 
This became the standard Teletype page printer that was to see service all over the world. 
Quieter in operation than the Model 12, it was also less bulky. Of major importance was the fact that the paper platen which on the Model 12 moved as the message was typed-remained stationary while the type basket moved across the paper, eliminating paper feeding problems. 
The machine also offered a broader scope for extra features, such as control of associated equipment, tabulating mechanisms, and handling of business forms. In design, it was as nearly as possible a page version of the Model 14 tape printer, with all that unit’s mechanical simplicity, sturdiness. and extreme reliability for unattended services. 
With the Model 15 printer available, the Bell System inaugurated TWX - teletypewriter Exchange Service - in 1931. Subscribers were able to type by wire to each other, through a switchboard connecting system, just as they could talk to each other by telephone. The big advantage was that a written record of the message was available at both ends. In its first year an average of only 50 TWX messages were sent daily. Now approximately 40,000 teletypewriters send almost 100,000 messages over a huge nationwide network every day. 
In 1932 Teletypesetter equipment was introduced to the newspaper and printing fields. This is essentially a combination of teleprinting and machine typesetting. Using paper tape perforated in six-level code, the “TTS,” as it has come to be called, replaces manual operation of linecasting machines with automatic operation at high speeds, producing double or more the output normally obtained by manual methods. 
When used with its associated Teletype equipment, TTS can also set type at many distant points simultaneously. Thus it is used by newspapers not only for local copy but to speed press association stories directly into type, and by large weekly magazines and financial dailies which must be printed in several plants simultaneously. It has also found many interesting uses in specialty printing, such as directories and greeting card imprints. 
Another development which reached maturity during the '30s was that of message relaying. In extensive network, with a large number of machines, it is neither economical nor practical to set up wire lines so every printer can contact every other printer in the network directly. Instead, relay points or message centers are established which accept traffic from the surrounding areas and send it along to its destination or the next relay point. 
In early days such relaying was handled by redoing the messages on a printer or perforator keyboard. This was plainly a duplication of effort. In 1925 Morkrum made an early form of “reperforator” or receiving perforator for the Associated Press. This provided the relay points with the press stories in punched tape, and they could be sent along by simply feeding the tape into a transmitter-distributor. 
A production reperforator was introduced in 1928. Principal users were the railroads, the Bell System, and, afterwards, the military. 
Later a unit was developed which combined a reperforator with a typing mechanism-the famous “typing reperforator” -which eliminated the need for the attendants at the relay points to know the Baudot code. The unit was first used in a system installed by the Postal Telegraph-Cable Company in 1940. It was in this system also that, multiple-mounted transmitter distributors and message numbering transmitter distributors were first used, all of the equipment being grouped in cabinets. 
This came to be known as the “torn-tape” method of message relaying, because the attendant severed each message as it came in simply by tearing it, after which it was fed into the transmitter by hand. It is still the simplest and most flexible method of relaying and is in wide use today. Another method of relaying, called “push button” or “semi-automatic” was developed later by the Western Union Telegraph Company. Here the attendant reroutes the message by reading the address on the tape, then pushing a button to switch in the appropriate transmitter-distributor. 
As industry expanded following its recovery from the depression of the early thirties, establishing a pattern of widely scattered branch plants, many companies turned to Teletype equipment as an efficient means of centralizing operations and communications. Two of the private wire networks engineered just prior to World-War II, for General Electric and Republic Steel, were milestones in the printing telegraph art. They were equipped with the first fully automatic switching systems, developed by the Bell Telephone Laboratories, with Teletype designing special printing telegraph components and cabinetry. 
The automatic: equipment at the communication center does an almost miraculous job. It “reads” the address code on the incoming message and directs it to the proper destination or to several destinations simultaneously. If the line should be busy, it can store the message temporarily for transmission later. It also controls the starting and stopping of machines at outlying points, and acts as a “traffic cop” to level out message flow. 

TELETYPE IN UNIFORM 
When World War II started, armies needed words with wings. Quick, accurate communication-with a written record available-was vital to the movement of millions of men and women, vast quantities of munitions, hundreds of thousands of vehicles and supply items, and thousands of planes to and from every corner of the world. 
Teletype, like other firms, was to know some unfamiliar assignments, such as the manufacture of component parts for gun directors. But its real war task was to manufacture its own communications equipment-and to produce that equipment in the greatest possible quantities and the shortest possible time. The Wrightwood plant went to three shifts, additional space was leased, thousands of new employees were hired. Subcontractors by the dozen were called upon for help, “expediter” and “coordinator” became familiar words. 
For the lines of command reached everywhere-from Washington, from London, from Australia, from Pearl Harbor, from field headquarters, and from flagships at sea. Wherever men and women were involved in the struggle because rapid and accurate communication often meant the difference between victory and defeat there also were Teletype machines. 
Circuits were developed into systems and systems into world-girdling networks that stretched from igloos to South Sea jungles, from offices in the Pentagon to command posts in German castles. 
In the field the teletypewriter moved with the arms. On the sea, it moved with ships. Maintenance and shipping difficulties caused by differing climates, transportation, and rough handling, were met and overcome. 
The variety of installations was almost infinite. Masses of messages were carried between principal centers in this country, and then fanned out to ultimate destinations. 
Tactical circuits were in constant use for ordering equipment, troops, and planes into immediate action. 
Control of the flow of supplies and personnel, coordination of production and the vital administrative message traffic required more and more Teletype equipment at home. Overseas, command circuits connected principal headquarters with air fields, with troop centers, and with warships. 
The pace at Teletype quickened to meet the challenge and production soared until in 1944 it was 15 tithes what it was in 1939. That year the men and women of Teletype received the Army-Navy “E” award for their production record. 
Novel special applications were developed during the war. By modifying a page printer and connecting it with an optical projector, visual briefing material was flashed aboard carriers from a central point to pilots’ ready rooms. An adaptation of this idea created a new word - and a new idea - teleconferences between groups widely separated. 
One use of Teletype equipment which caught the imagination of the world was for personal “conversations” between President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill. A secret device scrambled the messages beyond the possibility of their being decoded if intercepted by the enemy. 
On June 6, 1944 there was sent one of the most dramatic Teletype messages ever transmitted. In newspaper offices and radio stations throughout the country the “stand by” warning was typed out. A few minutes later came the signal for news that would change the course of the war - then FLASH! “Eisenhower Headquarters Announces Allies Land in France.” 
For Teletype perhaps one of the most important results of the wartime use of its equipment was that millions of people from all walks of life personally discovered this efficient communication medium for the first time while in service. This created a powerful impetus for its expansion into peace-time uses. In addition, numerous installations overseas, many of which became war surplus, were purchased by foreign governments and organisations. 

TELETYPE TODAY
With the coming of peace, Teletype returned to its civilian role, and was soon hard at work to meet the backlog of demand built up during the long years when all effort was devoted to winning the war. To this backlog were now added the demands of a rapidly expanding economy. Teletype equipment came into ever wider use to solve new communications problems resulting from distance, complexity, faster pace, and heavier volume of business. 
Military communication needs also continued substantial, with American troops more scattered than they had ever been before, on practically every continent. When the Korean conflict broke out, large quantities of Teletype equipment were required. A continuous development program to meet defense needs resulted in the introduction of such equipment as the electronic multiplex (for sending several messages simultaneously over a single channel), a torn-tape relaying system packaged and powered for easy transfer from one location to another, and a 600 speed tape transmission system. 
RAILROADS - By this time Teletype equipment was in service for railroads in a great number of ways. It streamlined and speeded up the handling of perishable freight, car tracings, passenger reservations, train departures and arrivals, and switching operations in freight classification yards. 
To these were now added new techniques, such as “tape to card and card to tape,” enabling the railroads to simplify and expedite the preparation and handling of train consists and manifests, and yielding important savings in their accounting procedures. 
CAA WEATHER REPORTS - Shortly after the end of World War II an interesting project was undertaken for the Civil Aeronautics Administration, whose 600 weathermen in locations from Alaska to Florida send in hourly reports over a Teletype equipment network, going through regional relaying points and distributed throughout the system. 
The problem was to place the pickup of data from the outlying weathermen on an automatic basis, to utilize the wire lines at full efficiency as well as eliminate the time the men spent waiting their turn to send reports. 
Teletype developed a device known as the Sequential Control (SECO) so each man could punch his report in a tape, put the tape in a transmitter, and go about other work. The SECO at the regional receiving center automatically turns the transmitters on in proper rotation, picking up the taped messages. If the report from a station is not ready, SECO waits three seconds, then calls in the next station. 

THE RED CROSS - The American Red Cross has long operated a nation-wide leased wire Teletype installation tied in with overseas points to provide a world-wide emergency message center for members of the Armed Forces. The system is used in disasters when normal communications are disrupted. In these cases, mobile Red Cross units equipped with radio Teletype apparatus fill in until commercial service is restored. In a major disaster, these mobile units may handle more than 5,000 messages a day. Over-all, the “Amcross” system has grown until it now handles more than sixty million words a year. 
When Hungarian refugees were flown into Cramp Kilmer in 1956, the Amcross network was used to convey messages to friends and relatives throughout the United States. A special line was leased from Washington, D. C., to Toronto, Canada, to speed communications with the Canadian Red Cross.
OIL FLOW REGULATION - An interesting use involves the reguation of the flow of oil through pipe lines. Linked by a teletype network, a central control point automatically receives information from a number of locations, known as booster stations, as to oil flow. These stations are spotted long a pipeline which may be thousands of miles long, information received at the control point is the basis of regulation of flow through the line, either from wells or “tank farms” to meet refinery requirements. 
THE DEW LINE - Standing guard in far Northern Canada, the Distant Early Warning Line is a vital element in our defense against air attack. Teletype equipment plays an important part in its communication system. Similarly, Continental Air Defense Command, charged with initial active air defense based largely on DEW Line information, is linked by Teletype communication. 
NATIONAL POLICE NETWORK - One of the most interesting and important Teletype equipment networks in operation today is the coast-to-coast state police system-a great advance from the first localized police system, installed in Chicago in 1922. 
The National Police Teletypewriter Network, which began operations in 1956, l ink s 43 states and the District of Columbia. The communication network of each individual state is linked to the national network through a central location in the state, from which messages can be flashed to similar central points in other states. 
The system provides accurate and instantaneous printed communications, minimizing confusion and errors, and furnishing “documentary evidence” in flashing such items as warrant requests thus greatly facilitating the handling of jurisdictional problems. 
FINANCIAL USE - Nowadays it is commonplace for stock exchange member firms to depend heavily upon Teletype equipment, not only for quotation service, but also as a vital link in their large and exacting communication requirements. 
In a typical case, the order of a branch office customer for the purchase or sale of securities will be teleprinted directly from the distant office to the New York Stock Exchange floor. The order is filled and confirmation teleprinted back to the originating office - all in a minute or two. With the confirmation, a copy is sent simultaneously to the accounting department, saving much clerical effort. 
In another typical case, billing machines in branch offices go to work after the market closes, automatically typing out confirmations of each trade made that day by local customers. The data for these trades are computed on business machines in New York, translated onto teleprinter tape, and wired to each office. 
THE AUTOMOBILE INDUSTRY - Automobile manufacturers were early users of 'teletype equipment. Today they not only have large private wire networks for their internal communications needs, but also use Teletype equipment in specialized ways. For example, the modern automobile assembly line handles a succession of body styles, colors, and optional equipment in astonishing variety, made up to the orders of individual customers. A Teletype equipment network is used in scheduling the hundreds of assembly components and special accessories, to insure the flow of material to assembly points in proper sequence. 
INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE - TEX, the Radio Corporation of America's Teleprinter Exchange Service, provides two-way international communications to subscribers in more than 30 countries. American Cable and Radio System offers International Telex, a similar service, reaching thirteen countries from the United States and Canada. Both services are available to TWX subscribers, thus forming a world-wide system for person-to-person interchange of the written word. 
Leased Channel Service, the radio equivalent of leased private wire service, provides channels to international airlines, industrial organizations, stock and commodity brokers, and departments of the government for their own exclusive use. 
AMATEUR RADIO - Thousands of radio "hams" now transmit via Teletype equipment. In addition to providing an absorbing hobby for an increasing number of men and women, ham radio constitutes a communication reserve for emergencies, often being of invaluable aid where other means of communication are not available. Ham radio is also important in civil defense. 

NEW PLANT FACILITIES - Meeting the heavy postwar demand for Teletype equipment has necessitated a steady program of enlarging facilities. In 1950 Teletype acquired a manufacturing plant with 115,000 sq. ft. of floor area at 5701 Touhy Avenue, Niles, Illinois, just northwest of Chicago. In 1954 a large plant, with 376,000 sq. ft., was purchased at 4100 Fullerton Avenue, in Chicago; this location is used partly for office space to accommodate sales and merchandising activities, and partly for assembling and shipping. 
In 1956 Teletype acquired a manufacturing plant with 52,000 sq. ft. adjacent to the original Touhy structure. In addition 236,000 sq. ft. were leased in four Chicago locations, and considerable manufacture was subcontracted. New and greatly enlarged quarters were also leased for the Teletype School of Maintenance Training, at 201 N. Wells Street, Chicago. 
With a view to the future, Teletype early in 1957 purchased a tract of land at the Touhy location on which three buildings are to be erected - a manufacturing unit, an administration building, and a development and research center. Construction of the manufacturing unit, with 500,000 sq. ft., was begun immediately. Eventually the Touhy location will replace Wrightwood as Teletype Corporation’s headquarters. 
To obtain the advantages of a second geographical location, a 160 acre site was acquired in Little Rock, Arkansas, in the spring of 1957. Pilot operations in leased quarters are already under way. Later a 400,000 sq. ft. building is planned. The Little Rock location will be a completely autonomous manufacturing unit, from the purchase of raw material through machining, assembly, and merchandising. 

NEW EQUIPMENT FOR A NEW ERA 
Invention, research, development.these have always been stressed at Teletype. Thus the company undertook the development of an entirely new line of equipment - the Model 28. The apparatus was to be like nothing ever seen in the printing telegraph field. 
It was to run at 100 words per minute with less maintenance than required by conventional equipment at 60 words per minute - and at the same time it must be quieter in operation and lighter in weight. It was to have provision for incorporating extra features and remote controls on a scale hitherto undreamed of. It must take in its stride environmental handicaps such as arctic cold and tropical heat, as well as the shock, vibration, and non-level positions inherent in operating aboard moving vehicles. 
Finally, it was to be designed on the “building block” principle, to permit maximum interchange of parts, mechanisms, and units. Thus it would combine the benefits of manufacture by quantity production methods with a broad scope for meeting the often highly specialized requirements of the individual user. 
This “blue print” was actually conceived prior to World War II, but work began in earnest at war’s end. Naturally, many problems were encountered in designing a printer to so demanding a set of performance specifications, but one by one these were solved. After a succession of models, laboratory tests, and extensive field trials, the first lot of the new Model 28 page printers was ready late in 1950. Urgent needs of the Armed Forces in the Korean crisis were given priority, and it was not until 1953 that the machine was available to the general public. 
In looking at the new printer, perhaps the most striking feature is the replacement of the usual bulky type-basket with a miniature carriage consisting of a 1” x 3” type-box and a tiny print hammer. Internally, there are other innovations. The machine has no structural castings; side frames and base plate are resilient sheet metal. Speed and quiet operation are built in, not only with light-weight parts but with the principle of harmonic motions - so that the machine runs more smoothly and easily at 100 words per minute than conventional designs at slower speeds. Clutches are all-metal and call for oiling once or twice a year, in contrast to two weeks for felt clutches. 
Of exceptional interest is the provision for extra features and remote controls. This is handled through a mechanism called the “stunt box” (“stunt” being an old printing telegraph designation for non-typing functions). In effect a built-in sequential selector, this 9” x 4.4” unit has slots which can be equipped with trains of miniature parts or switches to perform an almost unlimited array of tasks. 
The “building block” principle can best be illustrated in the new composite set, the Model 28-ASR, introduced in 1957. Innumerable variations are possible in the basic combination of send-receive page printer, tape punch, and tape reader to fit the requirements of the individual user. 
Thus the Model 28 line is more versatile and more flexible than any printing telegraph equipment hitherto made. It is geared for today’s increasingly complex needs, with built-in provision for new demands which tomorrow is certain to bring. 

A LOOK AHEAD 
What of the future? Throughout its history, Teletype has constantly widened communications horizons. Today the possibilities and variations for new applications of Teletype equipment appear to be almost limitless. A period is now developing which future historians may compare to the onset of the Industrial Revolution, and such periods inevitably bring changes in accustomed practices. 
RECORD AND DATA PROCESSING - The field of office work, record keeping, and data processing is one in which change is already beginning to take place on a sizeable scale. There are a number of reasons for this. 
In the first place, there is the development of the complex and vastly ingenious computing machines which can accomplish in a few seconds data processing operations that would otherwise require thousands of skilled man hours. Second, many organizations are expanding to the point where time, cost, and control considerations make rapid processing of record data absolutely vital. Finally, there is the sheer mass of paperwork in which we are all engulfed, with the ratio of paper-handling effort to production effort rising steadily. 
Thus we find change entering the office under such names as automation, automated data processing, electronic data processing, and integrated data processing. Of these, the last, usually referred to as “IDP,” is probably best known. The general objectives of these various systems are (a) to eliminate duplication of typing effort by providing for automatic reproduction of repetitively used information (as in order, invoice, shipping label, and inventory entry); (b) to transmit the required portions of the information quickly and simultaneously to all departments and locations involved; (c) to provide up-to-the-minute records in all areas of the business for the guidance of management. 
Teletype equipment enters into such systems not only as a communication instrument to transmit information instantaneously wherever it is needed, but also to provide and reproduce punched tape and to type on forms. Much of this is on a “by-product” basis. 
The office revolution is leading to a further trend, that of geographically centralized accounting systems for large organizations. Here, computers handle the heavy paperwork jobs such as payrolls, statements, dividend payments, and freight car accounting, with Teletype communication networks to carry information to and from the outlying points. 
It is likely that in the future small businesses will enjoy similar advantages through independent computer services, or perhaps by banding together cooperatively or through their trade associations - with private wire or TWX networks providing a swift highway for the data. 
FACTORY AUTOMATION - Many new and ingenious developments in the field of factory automation can be expected in the coming years. Where such automation setups are based on perforated tape controls, Teletype equipment is available for tape preparation and tape “reading.” 
Control codes in tape can direct the positioning of machine tools through a series of operations - and can do this with pinpoint accuracy. Control codes can also “decide” which of a variety of possible sizes, shapes, and patterns the machine shall make, as well as the quantity to be produced. 
This suggests that for many products the manufacturers’ inventory problem may ultimately be solved by stocking only raw material and punched tapes, to turn out goods as needed at high speeds. Reduction of small lot costs will be an added benefit of such a system. 
HIGH SPEED TAPE TRANSMISSION - High transmission speeds from punched tape for specialized purposes are the subject of increasing attention. Teletype’s 600 word per minute system is already in service in one network for moving bulk message traffic between key points across country. High speed capacity in punched tape is also retired in connection with certain data processing operations. The next step from 600 words per minute is 1,000 words per minute-already practicable - and much higher speeds are likely in the future. 
EQUIPMENT DESIGN - One of the most important influences on current design of electronic equipment of all kinds is the transistor, invented at the Bell Telephone Laboratories. Teletype IRIS put this “mighty mite” to work in a transistorized version of its “electronic multiplex,” which is used to combine the signals from several communication channels for transmission over a single channel. A comparison of size, weight, and power requirements between the transistorized multiplex and its vacuum-tube predecessor is startling. The new set is about the size of a two-drawer file, with a volume of 10.5 cu. ft., compared to 55 cu. ft. for the previous set; weighs 260 lbs., compared to 1,450 lbs., and draws 50 watts compared to 1,400 watts. 
THE STUNT BOX - The stunt box of the Model 28 printer, whose versatility has barely begun to be probed, offers interesting possibilities as a low-cost automatic control instrument. This mechanism has the ability to “ride the line” and watch for specified characters or sequences of characters. When it detects such a control signal, it can throw a lever or a switch-thereby initiating whatever action may have been called for by the signal. 
For example, in response to assigned codes in punched tape, it can automatically direct information to certain receiving instruments on a circuit, while withholding portions of the message from others and shutting out still others altogether. In another type of application, such as transmitting orders to warehouses, it can perform both routing and sorting jobs. Thus the information can be fed into the system in a random manner, without being presorted in the locations where the specified goods are stored. 
The number of locations which could thus be reached is theoretically unlimited and is governed only by the volume of traffic that can be handled from a single control center in a given time span. Since the stunt, box can recognize sequences of control codes as well as single codes, the number of permutations available for a coding system runs into the thousands. 
AUTOMATIC REPORTING - When the first Morkrum printer was tested on the Chicago and Alton Railroad in 1908, one of its principal advantages was that, unlike Morse, no operator was required at the receiving end to decode and type out the messages Reception was automatic, or “unattended.” 
In some fields, we are now entering a phase where transmission as well as reception can be unattended. Thus weather observations could be made and scientific tests conducted in remote and inaccessible geographic areas and in cosmic spaces. Instruments could then translate measurements made by them into telegraph code, for instantaneous transmission and recording on Teletype equipment wherever the data may be desired. 
Carrying this principle a step further, we have automatic process control for factories, with instruments initiating, checking and correcting the process as needed-and transmitting a continuous progress report to management on a Teletype printer. 
These are but a “sampling” of the many areas in which Teletype equipment can be expected to serve in the years to come. Developments now in the laboratory and testing stages will open many additional fields, meet a host of new needs. Teletype’s 50 years of experience in the design and manufacture of printed communications equipment provide a unique back-log of "know-how" to meet the opportunities and challenges of the era of rapid technological progress that lies ahead. 

THE TELETYPE FAMILY 
Teletype Corporation, like all companies, is a mirror of the men and women whose imagination, skills, and energy translate ideas into products and services. From the first, the company has appreciated that its success must be based on the faith and effort of its people, and the people have in turn taken pride in the company’s contributions to the nation in war and peace and the role it has played in the spectacular advance of modern communications. 
The welfare of its people both on and off the job is of constant concern to the company. Teletype employees are covered by a comprehensive Benefit Plan, which helps provide for their retirement with a non-contributory pension plan and protects their families with death and sickness benefits. These benefits increase with length of service. 
Education is encouraged, with in-service training programs and a tuition-refund plan. The on-the-job program includes such subjects as designer training, tool and die apprenticeship, job grading and supervisory training. The tuition-refund plan allows employees up to $250 per year for college attendance in their free time on an undergraduate or graduate level in broadly job-related courses. 
Teletype employees also have opportunities to participate in the various special Western Electric advanced training programs. Some of these are conducted on a cooperative basis with leading universities, such as workshops and seminars to keep engineers abreast of fast-breaking developments in the scientific and technical fields. 
In addition, the employee-run Teletype Evening School - which is complete even to its own principal - offers instruction covering such subjects as first aid, shop math, blueprint reading, electricity and basic principles of Teletype equipment and communications. 
Social and recreational opportunities have been part of the Teletype picture from the earliest days. The original Wright wood site included considerable adjoining land, and employees soon put part of it to good use for tennis and volley ball courts. Also receiving enthusiastic participation in those days was noontime dancing, to the “hot” music of one or another of the ragtime piano practitioners. Beach parties were also good for after work get-togethers, and in the late Twenties long service employees were honored at an annual banquet. 
Since 1936, all company “extra curricular” activities have been coordinated under the sponsorship of the Teletype Club, an organization operated and managed exclusively by and for Teletype employers. 
Club activities afford everyone an equal opportunity to participate. Sports enthusiasts find pleasure in golf, softball, archery and bowling. Hobbyists, too, find their enjoyment in gardening and camera groups. There are also picnics, square dances, amateur theatricals, concerts and ballet to attend. A Christmas party is given annually for employees' children, with each youngster receiving a gift from Santa Claus. 
The culminating event on the Club's annual calendar is the election of the Teletype Queen, designated the "Hi-Telepal" girl. She is chosen by employee ballot the four runners-up becoming her “court” - and is formally crowned at the annual coronation dance. 
Teletype’s “senior citizens” - those with 21 years or more of service to the Bell System - are eligible for membership in the Telephone Pioneers of America. Here they find rewarding fellowship and the opportunity to remain in touch even after they retire from active service. Teletype employees now have their own Council of some 300 members in the Pioneer organization. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Teletype Model 33 and 32
Training Manual B-52

Presented by the General Telephone Co. of Ohio
General Telephone Company of Ohio
Plant Training Course B-52
Model 33 Teletype Equipment
Also includes training on Model 32 Teletype Equipment as both models share common mechanical and electrical equipment. The major difference is the Model 33 utilizes ASCII code whereas the Model 32 uses ITA2 code based on the early Baudot & Murray code.

1, INTRODUCTION
The objective of this guide is to outline the essential principles of the Teletype signaling codes.
This guide will discuss the basic five-level code and the more advanced eight-level code, more commonly referred to as the American Standard Code for Information Interchange, (ASCII).

2.
TELETYPE HISTORY
The invention of the teletype cannot be attached to any one particular person, but evolved through the years from 1849 to the present date through improvements and modifications to the modern teletypewriters.
The Bell System entered the teletype field in 1915 when a private line circuit was installed for the Associated Press. More systems followed and about 1925, the first switching system was installed for the Detroit Edison Company. The next major step was a state-wide system for the Pennsylvania State Police with four switching centers. This led to the establishment of national switching center plan of the TWX (Teletypewriter Exchange Service). Growth of teletype is a result of customer need for adequate communications. There are in excess of 150,000 TWX stations in service, and it is still growing.
The program of mechanized TWX has been in the planning stage for some time and was completed with a flash cut-over on September 2, 1962. This being the latest step now permits direct connection of machines nationwide without the use of an operator to switch the calls manually. The machines were cut with 60 W.P.M. operation and are now operating at 100 W.P.

2.1 In ordinary telegraph transmission, as devised by Samuel Morse, intelligence is relayed from one point to another by the making and breaking of the signal line. The operator at the transmitting end of the line opens and closes a key activating a sounder at the receiving station. These sounds are translated by the receiving station operator into the characters and symbols making up the message.
The drawbacks to this system are of course quite obvious. A network of telegraph stations can pass traffic only as fast as the slowest operator can send or receive. There is the constant possibility of a miss-sent or erroneously copied character with no way of verifying the transmission. Also, every station requires constant attendance.
To overcome these weaknesses a French signal officer, named Jean Baudot, envisioned a method of mechanically transmitting a signal that would activate a printing mechanism. The new method of printing telegraphy required modification of the basic Morse code. The primary change was the control over the time interval of each transmitted pulse. Specified time intervals of pulse lengths were to replace the arbitrary dot-dash system of each operator.

In order to encompass the 26 letters of the alphabet and a number of purely mechanical functions required to operate a printing mechanism, Mr. Baudot determined that the basic conditions, (current-on-line, no current-on-line), would have to be expanded. He accomplished this by taking the two basic conditions and raising them to the fifth power, (2? = 2x2x2x2x2), for a total of 32 possible combinations. Therefore, each character is a combination of five pulses, with each pulse having two possible conditions.
The two conditions referred to above shall be called by their more common names, current-on-line - MARKING, no current-on=line = SPACING, throughout the remainder of this guide.
Subsequent to the development of this basic code, a printer was developed with the addition of an uppercase, referred to as FIGURES, thereby expanding the capabilities of the code to twice as many characters, or 64 possible characters.
In the lower case, or letters, we have the 26 letters of the alphabet plus 6 or more, so called, "functions." These functions are mechanical operations of the printer as opposed to the actual printing of a character. They include: 4
Letters (LTRS) = Either shifting the type box to the letters segment or alpha position.
Figures (FIGS) = Shift the typebox to print numeric
Space = Moving the printing mechanism to leave a blank between words.
Carriage Return (C.R.) = Returning the printing mechanism to the left margin.
Line Feed (L.F.) = Feeding the paper out of the printer.

Types of Service
Private Line Service - Private Line Teletypewriter Service provides a direct and continuous connection between two or more teletypewriters at specific points. This service is provided under a monthly contract. It does not connect with a central office. It may be provided on one of three options: one-way, half-duplex (two-way alternate), and full-duplex which is two-way simultaneous messages. It is available at three speeds: 60, 75, and 100 words per minute). The average word consists of five characters and one space, In the binary counting system, this equals 46, 57, or 74 bits per second. Some special applicetions using high speed data sets may be accessed to the same line or facility. Other special features include automatic tape transmission, selective arrangement for accessing a particular station, direct feeding into typesetting machines.
MIWX - Teletypewriter service is furnished on an exchange basis and the messages are completed via exchange or toll switching facilities. Mechanized teletypewriter service was inaugurated on a national basis September 2, 1962. The teletypewriter is equipped with a subset that has a dial and a receiver and is connected to a central office equipped for direct distance dling and automatic number identification. All teletype stations are assigned an exchange number of seven digits plus the NPA code of three digits. Most stations will be provided on half-duplex arrangements although full-duplex is available with the subset provided. To reach an office with DDD and ANI, the teletypewriter will be connected via a loop circuit. All calls will be completed by dialing a ten-digit number.
Other services such as collect calls and conference calls will be handled by operators at special boards for teletype stations. At this time, all machines will be set for 60 words per minute operation. In the future, this will be chanted to 100 words per minute.

ANALYZING A CHARACTER
As we saw on the preceding page, the basis fot our present day Teletype Code is the mechanical control of the combinations of MARK and SPACE conditions associated with the individual characters. The length of time duration of the individual pulses used to make a character is determined by the motor speed of the unit, which through 2 gear train, operates the various cams and levers that ultimately open and close the signal line. We may say them, that as the mechanical operating speed of the unit increases, the time interval of the total character decreases. A little later on we will shows this graphically.
At the present time there are three basic transmitter shaft speeds in popular usage. They are 368 rpm, 460 rpm, and 600 rpm of shaft speed. A conversion of these speeds into the more widely used term "words-per-minute" may be accomplished by dividing each figure by 6. (This assumes that the average word contains five characters and a space between it and the next word.) Thus, 368 rpm becomes 60 wpm, 460 rpm is about 75 wpm, and 600 is 100 wpm. For maintenance or other technical purposes it is far more accurate to deal only with the actual shaft speed. If, for every revolution of the transmitting shaft a complete character is transmitted, we may state that a complete operation has been performed. Therefore, our rpm's becone operations-per-minute.
The first step in determining the total time of a single character is determining the operations-per-second.
We now can say we transmit 10 characters-per-second, since each operation is a character.
The next step is to break these 10 characters down to find the time of a single character.
We now see that at 600 opm each character is 0.10 seconds, or 100 milliseconds (MS) long. This same method may be used for any operating speed to determine the character length.
Before we can start breacking the individual character into its separate pulses, and determining their length, we have to consider one other facet of our individual character. In order that both the transmitting and receiving units are operating together (synchronization) additional pulses are required. They are called the START and STOP pulses. Since these pulses are attached to every character they are not considered information pulses. In the majority of applications the START and five information pulses are of equal length, with the STOP pulse being of a longer duration. This added length, (usually 42%) is a safety feature to insure that the receiving unit has time to completely detect the last information pulse before the transmitter begins the next character.
The 7.42 unit character is known as the Standard Unit Code for five-level transmission. One exception to this standard is a straight 7 unit code. An example of this is Western Union, which uses a stop pulse the sane length as the start and information pulses. This unit code plus a variance in shaft speed allows for 65 wpm operation, We will discuss this a little later in this guide.
Now to return to find the duration of each of the five individual information pulses and the start pulse:
The above information applies to five-level only. Before trying to find the pulse length for the eight-level equipment we should note three things:
1, The total character length (in milliseconds), for any given shaft speed will be the same for both five and eightlevel codes.
2, I£ the total character length ( in milliseconds) is equal for both the 5 and 8 level codes: then it follows that the 8 level code employing 3 information code levels more than the 5 level must necessarily have each of its code pulse correspondingly shorter timewise.
3. Two units are used as the safety feature in the eight-level stop pulse.
We now have an 11 Unit Code for eight-level transmission.
To determine the length of each pulse in the eight-level code, we use the same formula as in the five-level:
As you have probably noticed in the signal diagrams, the start pulse has been represented as a no current-on-line (SPACING) condition, and that the stop pulse has been drawn as a current-on-line (MARKING) condition. This holds true for both five and eight-level because the normal, or "REST condition of the signal line is with current-on-line. If the normal condition is MARKING the beginning of the next character must alter that condition. Obviously then, the start pulse must be no current or SPACING. The end of the character must return the signal line to its normal condition so the stop pulse or pulses must be MARKING.

TELETYPEWRITER SIGNAL RECEPTION
It should be remembered that no matter what form of transmission is used between teletypewriters, that the printing magnets of the machines always operate from one of two current conditions: (1) 62.5 milliamperes of current for marking and no current for spacing; or (2) 20 milliamperes of current for marking and no current for spacing. This is known as neutral operation.
The pulse from the line pass through the magnet winding and cuase its armature to move back and forth under control of the marking and spacing elements. The START element (spacing) causes the armature to be released and operate a trip-off device. This permits a selection cam to start rotating at a definite speed. Depending on whether the encoding elements which follow are marking or spacing, the code bars will be positioned either to the left or right. This operation sets up the rest of the mechanism to print the selected character. The STOP element (marking) causes the trip-off device to return to its original position.
The selecting mechanism is arranged to operate only momentarily during the reception of the central portion of the marking and spacing encoding elements. From this it can be seen that because the rotation of the selecting cam is at a constant speed, the operation of the rotated selector can be related time-wise to the beginning of the START pulse. Square pulses can be shifted behind or ahead time-wise 40% of an encoding element length and still produce perfect copy. This is because the momentary operation of the selector is still within the reception interval of the element. (The figure is not 50% because of internal characteristics of the machine.)

POLAR OPERATION
Until now only NEUTRAL operation has been discussed. We have seen in NEUTRAL, operation a SPACE has been the NO current-on-line condition, and a MARK is the current-on-line condition. In POLAR operation, there is current on the signal line at all times. It is the polarity of the current that determines whether a MARK or a SPACE is being transmitted. The MARKING signal will have a positive volcage, and the SPACING signal will use a negative voltage of the same amplitude.
Obviously, the receiving machine could not be directly connected to a POLAR signal line because current, no matter what polarity, would energize the magnets in the selector mechanism. That is to say, a magnet cannot differentiate between a positive or negative voltage, and we would initiate the sane actions and responses for both a MARKING and SPACING impulse. Therefore, a relay or selector magnet driver mechanism is used between the receiver and the signal line.
Either of these devices converts the POLAR signal line transmission to a NEUTRAL signal for use by the selector assembly in the receiving equipment.
The following signal diagram graphically portrays the difference between NEUTRAL and POLAR operation for any current, code level, or speed.

5, BAUD RATE
The word baud is derived from the name Baudot (Ref. p.1). The baud Fate, sometimes called the bit rate, is simply an expression which combines Doth shaft speed (operations-per-second) and the particular unit code being used into one usable term or figure. It indicates the maximum usable number of pulses-per-second that a given piece of equipment can handle.
The main use for the baud rate is compatibility between equipment. If we have a transmitter and receiver with equal baud rates we know that traffic can be passed between them. An unequal baud rate tells us that without modification, or additional equipment we cannot transmit between the equipment in question.
To find the baud rate multiply the operations-per-second by the unit code being used.
We can see from the above examples that although the shaft speeds and unit codes differ, these units would be compatible because of equal wud rates.
One more example of baud rate is the eight-level code.
The increase of either the operations-per-second, or the unt code increases the baud rate. Remember, baud rate is sizply a term of compatibility. Before leaving the baud rate we should clarify the difference between baud rate and bit rate. The speed of a unit In bits-per-second is not equal to the speed in bauds unless all pulses or bits of e character are of equal duration. The following chart will illustrate the relationsh'p between shaft speed (opm), bits and bauds.

TELETYPEWRITER CODE
1.03 Teletypewriters transmit and receive messages by means of a binary permutation code (Figures 1 and 2), The characters making up the messages (letters, numerals, symbols, functions, etc) are represented by prearranged combinations of binary intelligence elements (also referred to as levels, or bits), each of which may be in one of two states—on or off. Depending on whether, a 5- or 8-level code is employed, each combination consists of five, six, seven, or eight intelligence elements, she total number of permutations available in a given code is equal to 2 to the nt power, where "n" is the number of intelligence elements. For example, in a 6-level code, there are 2 to the 6th power, or 64, permutations.
1.04 In the various stages of a communication system using teletypewriter equipment, the above code may occur in a number of different forms, including parallel or sequential electrical pulses, mechanical positions of parts, code holes in paper tape, and tone frequencies. For transmission purposes, it is placed in an electrical form referred to as a start~stop signaling code, or simply a teletypewriter code (Figures 1 and 2). The intelligence elements are applied sequentially to a signal line as current or no-current time intervals. Intervals during which current flows in the signal line are referred to as "marking" elements, and intervals during which no current flows as "spacing" elements, To insure synchronization between the transmitting and receiving equipment, a start element, which is always "spacing," is added at the beginning of each combination of intelligence elements, and a stop element, which is always "marking," is added at the end.
1.05 In different signaling codes, the length of the stop element may vary. For example, in the teletypewriter code illustrated in Figure 1, the length of the stop element is 1.5 times the other elements. Thus, the transmission of a character requires 7.5 units of time. It is therefore said to have a 7.5-unit transmission pattern,

A. 32 Typing Units
1.06 The teletypewriter code accommodated by the 32 typing unit is illustrated in Figure 1. Since it has five intelligence elements and its stop element is 1.5 units of time, it is a S-level code with a 7.5-unit transmission pattern, It has 2 to the 5¢ power, or 32 available permutations.
1.07 To accommodate more than 32 characters, a letters-figures shift is designed into the typing unit. This is similar to the lower and upper-case of a typewriter and permits each code combination, excluding the two used to shift the equipment, to represent two characters.
1.08 A character arrangement is shown on the chart in Figure 1, The black circles represent marking elements; the blank squares represent spacing elements. When the "letters" code combination (12345) is transmitted, it conditions all typing units connected to the circuit to print, at the receipt of all following code combinations, the characters in the letters (lower case) line on the chart. Similarly, when the "figures" code combination (12-45) is transmitted, it conditions the typing units to print the characters or perform the functions in the figures (upper case) line on the chart.

B. 33 Typing Units
1.09 The American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) accommodated by the 33 typing unit is illustrated in Figure 2. Since it has eight intelligence elements and its stop element is 2 units of time, it is an 8-level code with an 11-unit transmission pattern, However, at the present it utilizes only the first seven intelligence elements, the eighth being used to provide an error detection feature called "even parity."When "even parity" is not provided, the eighth intelligence element is always transmitted as a marking element. Thus, it has 2 to the 7th power, or 128, available permutations. Of these combinations, 64 are assigned to printing characters. The rest are devoted to control (nonprinting) characters, or are unassigned.
Note: "Even parity" is an error detection feature which provides for adding a pulse whenever the number of marking pulses in a code combination is odd.
1.10 The character arrangement for the ASCII code is shown on the chart in Figure 2. The black circles represent marking elements, the blank squares spacing elements. The main block gives the arrangements of elements 1 through 5. The four smaller blocks at the right give the arrangements of elements 6 and 7 for the four rows of characters as indicated by the arrows. When "even parity" is provided, characters and functions which have white backgrounds in the character arrangement chart have the eighth intelligence element spacing — dark backgrounds have the eighth intelligence element marking. For keyboard transmission, two SHIFT keys and a CTRL key are used as covered in the appropriate keyboard section.

6.
6.1
SIGNAL DISTORTION:
For purposes of illustration, Teletype pulses are shown as perfect rectangular waveshapes with sharp transitions and precise timing. This optimum condition is seldom, if ever, found in actual practice.
The modification of the original, rectangular waveshape is called DISTORTION. The Total Distortion to any signal ie broken down into three categories for purposes of classification, but it is also important to note that any signal may contain all three components of distortion.
The three components of distortion are: Bias Distortion, Characteristic Distortion, Fortuitous Distortion.
Bias and characteristic distortion are combined in the term Systematic Distortion because both occur in response to natural law and, consequently, either is roughly predictable. With the third element, Fortuitous Distortion, uncontrolable occurrences (hits on the line, Loose ground connections, etc.), are accounted for. With the introduction of the selector magnet driver, distortion has been greatly reduced. Inasmuch as signal distortion does still exist, the following may prove helpful.

BIAS DISTORTION:
Bias Distortion effects all pulses uniformly and its effect upon a MARK is opposite to its effect upon a SPACE, Bias may alter either the beginning or the end of an impulse, but inasmuch as the selector always begins with the MARK-to-SPACE transition of the Start pulse, the total effect of bias is to advance or retard the leasing edge of any impulse.
Before illustrating Bias, it will be necessary to indicate the effect, upon a signal pulse, by the resistive, inductive and capacitive elements in the signal line.
1. Perfect MARK impulse.
2. Line INDUCTANCE opposes sudden transition of current. Inductance from Line Relays and/or selector Fig. 2 magnet coils.
3. Line CAPACITANCE shunts the signal line preventing rapid current build-up and, thus, further sloping the edges of the wave. Fig. 3
The impulse in Figure 3 is more likely to be found at the receiving printer than the one impressed at the transmitter, (Figure 1). The impulse seen in Figure 3, as applied to the selector magnets of the printer, will be used to illustrate Bias Distortion. It will be noted that this waveshape builds up to its 500 ma level gradually.
Instead of picking up at the leading edge of the pulse (Tl), the selector magnet will energize at a somewhat later time -- say, for example, at T2 -- or, whenever the current has reached a level where it generates sufficient magnetic attraction. This point, T2, would be the beginning of the MARK impulse as far as the selector was concerned.
When, at the end of the transmitted pulse, the current again starts towards J ma, the selector armature should, the oretically, fall away at T3. The trailing edge of the impulse, however, also slopes, consequently, a definite time will have elapsed before the armature will drop away (T4). Notice that T2 and T4 are not identical current values. The de-energization point will be of lower value due to residual magnetism in the coils.
The time between when the armature should attract (Tl) and when it does attract (12) is known as SPACE-to-HARK TRANSITION DELAY. (Abbr. S-MTD).
The time between when the armature should drop away (T3) and when it does drop away (T') is known as MARK-to-SPACE TRANSITION DELAY. (Abbr. M-STD).
If the ST is equal to the M-STD, the pulse as sean by the selector would be undistorted.
If the S-+41D is greater than the M-STD, the pulse has been shortened and the condition is known as SPACING BIAS.
If the M-STD is greater than the S-MTD, the pulse has been lengthened and the condition is known as MARKING BIAS.
The Bell System uses the following formula to determine the actual Bias condition in milliseconds (ms). The sign of the result indicates whether the Bias ie MARKING (+) or SPACING (~)
M-STD - S-4TD = ms. Bias
This example of Bias Distortion illustrates that although the M-STD may not equal the S-MID, the two will be consistent for any given circuit and/or adjustment. It will be noted, also, that the effect of Bias will:
a) Be the opposite to a SPACE from its effect upon a MARK.
b) Be consistent for any character combination.

CHARACTERISTIC DISTORTION
Characteristic Distortion, as the name implies, is determined by the signal line characteristics. That is, the resistance, capacitance and inductance of the signal line. This type of distortion will effect different characters in different ways but it will always be consistent for the seme character. In neutral operation, Characteristic Distortion will effect Bias.
Characteristic Distortion has varying effects upon different characters because the circuit's reactance will have less chance to become stabilized when characters with many current transitions are applied (U for example) than when characters with few transitions are applied (SPACE for example).
The contrast between Characteristic Distortion and Bias may be summarized a3 follows:
1. The effect of Characterictic Distottien depends upon the Length of the impulse transmitted. The effect of Bias is independent of the impulses.
2. For a given length of impulse, the effect of Characteristic Distortion is independent of whether it is a marking or spacing impulse. The effect of Bias is always opposite on a mark to what it is on a space.
3. Characteristic Distortion is related to the amount and arrangement of the capacitance, inductance and resistance of a circuit. Except in neutral operation, these factors do not effect Bias.
4. Bias is caused by unequal marking and spacing line current, biased relays, etc., conditions which do not effect Characteristic Distortion.
5. Characteristic Distortion, because it is due to the capacitance, inductance and resistance of a circuit, which except for the resistance, are unchanging in value, varies only a small amount from day to day. Bias, because it is caused by uneven potentials, relays losing adjustment, etc., may vary from hour to hour.

6.3 FORTUITOUS DISTORTION
This form of distortion covers such unpredictable occurrences as sudden battery fluctuations or loose ground connections. This distortion may effect any portion of any character and little or no compensation can be made for it.
It may shift a signal transition either way in a fortuitious or "chance" manner from which it derives its name. For this reason, it affects both ends of the margin range about equally, which is one of its most prominent characteristics.

7. RANGE
All Teletype receivers (i.e., printers, reperforators, etc.) are equipped with a range scale. In every case, the function of the range scale is to orient the mechanical selector to the electrical signal to obtain maximum selecting margins, (receiving margin).
The selecting interval of the impulse (i.e., when the actual selection is made) is only 20% of the pulse width. Consequently, a perfect selector should be able to tolerate 40% distortion of both leading and trailing portions of an impulse.
In a perfect impulse the necessary 20% selecting interval would be in the center with a range reading of 10 to 110.
In any situation, there is a standard procedure for determining the proper setting for the range scale:
a) Determine the high and low points on the range scale by moving the range scale indicator toward the upper limit until errors are observed in copy, then toward the lower limit until errors are again observed, (one error per two lines of copy).
b) Add the high point to the low point and divide by two, for optimum setting. (See examples in range illustrations)
If 20% MARKING END DISTORTION were introduced, the optimum setting would shift. To maintain the selecting interval in the middle of the pulse, will require the reorientation of the range scale indicator.
If 20% SPACING EAD DISTORTION were introduced the range would shift in an opposite direction, also requiring reorientation of the range scale

1, GENERAL
1.01 This section is reissued for the purpose of rearranging the material into a standard format and to add new Figure 3.
Teletypewriter equipment transmits and receives messages by means of a binary permutation code, The characters which make up the messages - letters, numbers, symbols, functions, etc. - are representated by prearranged combinations of binary intelligence elements (also referred to as levels, bits, units, or pulses), each of which may be In one of two states (on or off, etc.). 'The total number of permutations - or combinations - avatlable in a given code is equal to two to the n power (29), where n is the number of intelligence elements used to represent a character.
1.03 In the various stages of a communication system using teletypewriter equipment, a code may be expressed in a number of different forms, including parallel or sequential electrical pulses, mechanical positions of parts, code holes in paper tape, and tone frequencies, For transmission purposes, the code is converted to an electrical form, and is referred to as a start-stop signaling code or simply as a teletypewriter code. The intelligence elements are applied sequentially to a signal line as current or no-current time intervals, Intervals during which current flows in the signal line are referred to as marking elements, and during which no current flows as spacing elements. To insure synchronization between the transmitting and receiving equipment, a start element (always spacing) is added at the beginning of each combination of intelligence elements, and a stop element (always marking) is added at the end (Figure 1).

2. CODE
2.01 The data interchange code is an eight-level code, with an eleven-unit transmission pattern (Figure 1), Although it has eight available levels for character formation, only the first seven intelligence elements are utilized, the eighth element being always transmitted as marking, Therefore, the code provides two to the seventh power (2), or 128, available permutations (or combinations) for character formation, 64 of these combinations are assigned to printing characters (graphics). Of the remainder, some are assigned to control (non-printing) characters while others are unassigned or reserved for future use.
2.02 Figure 2 shows the assignment of characters to the code combinations. These are shown as they would appear in punched paper tape. The continuous row of small holes shows the position of the feed holes. Solid black circles indicate a marking element (hole in tape) while blank circles represent a spacing element (no hole). The main block shows the positions and arrangements for the one through five code levels, while the four smaller blocks (A, B, C, and D), at the right show the four possible combinations of the sixth and seventh levels for the characters indicated by the arrows.

EIGHTH LEVEL
2.03 The eighth intelligence level is not utilized in this code, but is transmitted - in all instances - as a marking pulse, The principle reason for retaining the eighth level intransmtssion, is to make possible the handling of messagesin codes which require alleight intelligence levels. The terms foreign or native language are used in connection with codes utilizing all eight intelligence levels, to indicate that the character assignments to the code combinations are different from (or forelgn to) the data Interchange code.
2.04 In addition to the principle reason for retaining the etghth pulse (see Paragraph 2.03), another advantage is provided, Since the eighth pulse immediately precedes the 2-unit stop pulse (Figure 1), it effectively lengthens the stop pulse by one unit. This is desirable, since it permits faster return tosynchronization in cases where transmission interference throws receiving machines out of synchronization.

3, PRINTING CONTROL GENERAL
3.01 The 64 characters, in rows Band C of Figure 2, are all printing characters, and are known as graphics. The assigned characters in rows A and D are control characters and, with the exception of ACK (acknowledge), are not printed.
PRINT SUPPRESSION
3.02 Print suppression in four-row teletypewriter printing devices is obtained by the following means:
(1) For characters in row A, the machine recognizes that the sixth and seventh intelligence elements are always spacing, and prevents printing on this indication,
(2) For the control character RUB-OUT, in row D, the machine recognizes that the character code consists of all marking elements. This is the only character of the entire code having this characteristic.
(3) For the control character ALT MODE (alternate mode), In row D, printing is suppressed by blinding the printer selector magnet when the ALT MODE key is depressed, Depressing this key also locks the keyboard.
3.03 If the code for any of the remaining characters in row D (even though unassigned) should appear in the system at a printing device the device would print the character in the corresponding position in row C, The reason for this, ts that the sixth intelligence element is not used In the printing operation. Observe that if the sixth intelligence level ts omitted from the C and D blocks (Figure 2), the codes for the characters in row C are identical with those of row D. Advantage is taken of this feature, in the situation discussed below, where a printed Andleation of a control function is needed.

REVERSE SLANT (\) SYMBOL
3.04 The reverse slant symbol (\) is used for two specific purposes:
(1) In instances where code conversion takes place between 3-row keyboard and 4-row keyboard systems. When the converter receives a character from one system which has no counterpart in the other system, the converter will operate a reverse slant which prints on the received copy. This indicates to the receiving operator that there is no such character in the receiving system corresponding to the character sent from the originating machine. The reverse slant symbol is used to take the place of both graphtes and control characters.
(2) Where acknowledgment (ACK) of the correct connection of a called station is requested by an inquiry of the form ARE YOU XXX. Answer to the inquiry (if affirmative) will be a reverse slant symbol which will print on the copy of the originating machine, The ACK character (\) will also serve to restart the transmitter, which was stopped to await acknowledgment to the inquiry,
Note: Observe in Figure 2 that the code assigned to the reverse slant symbol (--345-7) ts different from the code for ACK (--34567), even though they are both required to print the same symbol. The reason why ACK, a character outside of the graphic set, prints the reverse slant symbol is discussed in Paragraph 3.03 above.

4, SHIFT FUNCTIONS
GENERAL
4.01 There are two related but independent shift functions; one is controlled by the SHIFT key, and the other by the CONTROL (CTRL) key. The SHIFT key is used to generate the codes for the graphic symbols which appear on the upper keytop positions. The CONTROLkey, on the other hand, is used to generate the codes' for the control functions, the characters for which also appear as upper keytop symbols. In both SHIFT and CONTROL cases, the operation is accomplished by holding the key down while the appropriate character key is depressed. A graphic representation of the keyboard, shift functions and punched tape is shown in Figure 3.

SHIFT KEY
4.02 TheSHIFT key has two different functions for two differently treated groups of upper keytop graphic symbols. Table 1 lists the upper and lower keytop symbols effected by the SHIFT key in the two groups.
4.03 Referring to Figure 3, it can be seen that the codes for the lower keytop symbols, in Group of Table 1, differ from their corresponding upper keytop symbols in that the 5th intelligence level is marking. To print an upper keytop symbol in Group A, the SHIFT key, when held down, converts the 5th intelligence pulse of the lower keytop symbol from MARK to SPACE, and results in printing of the corresponding upper keytop symbol.
4.04 In a similar manner, the upper keytop symbols of Group B are printed. For these symbols, however, the SHIFT key, when held down, converts the 5th intelligence pulse of lower keytop symbol from SPACE to MARK (see Figure 3).
4.05 When the SHIFT key ts held down, all of the keys which do not print upper graphic symbols are mechanically locked, and cannot be operated. This prevents the possibility of sending false characters which might otherwise be operated.

CONTROL KEY
4.08 The CONTROL key operates in a manner which is analogous to that of the SHIFT key (Paragraphs 4.02 through 4.05). The CONTROL key is used to produce the codes for the upper keytop controls shown on Figure 3. Operation of the CONTROL key converts the 7th intelligence level from mark to space. Thus the code for any character in row C of Figure 2, which might be generated by the keyboard, is converted to the corresponding control character in rowA, This may be seen by comparing the codes for the control characters with the codes for their corresponding letter characters. Note that the codes are identical, except for the seventh intelligence level, which ts marking for all letter characters. For example, if the key for the letter D is struck while the control key is held down, the code generated will be that for EOT (end of transmission). In the same way the other control characters can be generated from the lower symbols by use of the CONTROL key.
4.07 Because of their frequency of use, separate keys are provided for line' feed, carriage return, rub out, and alternate mode, and the CONTROL key is not used in their generation. No means are provided for generating the characters UP CASE and LOW CASE.
4.08 Since the CONTROL key is not provided with a keyboard locking feature, it is possible, by use of the CONTROL key, to transform any of the codes for characters in rows C and D (Figure 2) to the corresponding codes in rows A and B, respectively. Since there is no automatic guard against this, it is the operator's responsibility not to generate false codes by such operation.
For additional information on a general description of the Model 33 TTY, see the following General System Practices:
574-100-102
574-100-201
574-100-800
574-126-100
574-126-700
574-126-800

GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Bail - A straight, or curved bar or blade, held or pivoted at the ends or middle. The bail in contrast to the bell cranks or lever does not change the direction of movement, but imparts motion to other parts which may come in contact with it at various points along its length. The bail on the left shows sbove moves to the left and pushes the bar to the left.
Baud - The nunber of bits transmitted per second. Arrived at by dividing the speed of the transmitting shaft by 60. Then multiplying the quotient by the stated unit code. 
Baudot Code - A five-level teletypewriter code consisting of a start impulse and five information impuises all of equal length, and a stop impulse whose length is 1.42 tines that of the start impulse. Also known as the 7.42 unit code.
Bell Crank - An "L" shaped lever rotating on a pivot fixed at the apex of the angle formed by the two arms and used to transmit and modify force and motion. The effect of the bell crank, illustrated below, causes a right angle change in the direction of movenent. A movement upwards at the left of che bell crank is converted into a rightward moverent at the upper end.
Bias, applied - A force (electrical, mechanical, or magnetic) applied to 4 relay or other device to cause it to hold or operate in a given direction.
Bias Distortion - A component of systematic distortion, which is such that interchanging the functions of the two current values used will change the sign of the systematic distortion but not its magnitude.
Bit - One impulse, or the time interval normally occupied by one impulse.
Cam - A projecting or indented part of a wheel which inparts movement to a follower riding against the circumference of the cam.
Characteristic Distortion - A fixed distortion which results in either shortened or lengthened impulses. It generally does not change in degree from day to day.
Clutch - A device consisting of a driving and driven member which, when engaged, mechanically couples two working parts of a machine
Cycle - One complete course of recurring operations or events.
Detent - A stop of holding device, as a pin, lever, ete., pressed against another party, such as a rachet, cam or bail, to prevent their movenent.
Duplex - Simultaneous transmission between two stations in both directions.
Eight-Level - Any teletypewriter code which utilizes eight impulses, in addition to a stop and start impulses, for describing a character.
Electromagnet = A core or magnetic material, such as soft iron, with a coil of wire surrounding it. In teletypewriter operation, the selector magnet.
End Distortion - A form of distortion which displaces the MARK-to-SPACE transition.
Five-Level - Any teletypewriter code which utilizes five impulses, in addition to the stop and start inpulses, for describing a character.
Fortuitous Distortion - An intermittent distortion which results in either shortened or lengthened impulses. It may be caused by battery fluctuation, hits: on the line, etc.
Gear - A set of cog wheels serving to transmit notion or change its rate or direction.
Helical or Spiral Gear - Gears with ceeth running at an angle across the gear.
Hit on the Line - A momentary open circuit on a teletypewriter loop.
Keyboard perforator - A mechanism, consisting of a keyboard and a perforator, by which tape is perforated in accordance with a code corresponding to the depressed cheracter key of the keyboard.
Lever - A rigid bar, turning freely on a fixed point or fulcrum and used for transmitting and modifying force and motion, As in the above diagram with the fulcrum or pivot placed at some point in the middle of the lever, the ends of the lever move in opposite directions. When the right side moves down, the left side is moved up. This feature of the lever is widely used in Teletype apparatus. If the fulcrum is placed at the extreme end of the bar, the direction of movement is the sane throughout the length of the lever.
Mark - An impulse which causes the signal loop to be closed. A current-on-line condition.
Marking End Disturtion - End distortion which lengthens the marking impulse by delaying the MARK-to-SPACE transition.
Mark-Hold - The normal no-traffic line condition whereby a steady mark is transmitted.
Marking Bias - Bias distortion which lengthens the marking impulse by advancing the SPACE-to-MARK transition.
Marking Contact - The contact of a telegraph or teletypewriter receiving relay which is closed when the relay is operated by marking current.
Marking Current - That magnitude and polarity of current in the line when the receiving mechanism is operated to the marking position.
Milliampere - A rate of current flow. One one-thousandth of an ampere. Expressed as .001 ampere or as 1 nilliampere.
Neutral Circuit - A teletypewriter circuit in which current flows in only one direction, The circuit is closed during the marking condition and open during the space condition.

M-33 General Description
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The Model 33 teletypewriter is an electromechanical communication apparatus that utilizes a four-row keyboard and an eight level code, It provides terminal facilities for exchanging information via appropriate communication facilities such as telegraph lines, telephone networks, radio channels, and carrier equipment. It is manufactured in 3 forms:
1. As a Send Receive Page Printer (KSR)
2. As a Receive-Only Page Printer (RO)
3. As an Automatic Send-Receive Set (ASR)
The KSR and ASR equipments employ a standard 4-row keyboard that can be operated by any typist without additional training,
Transmission and reception are effected by a start-stop signaling code (also referred to as the 8 Level American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII), which is carried by the transmission facilities.
Equipment may be used with DTWX or private line service. When used with DTWX, a Call Control Unit located to the right of the keyboard and printer {s used to provide facilities for initiating, accepting, controlling, and completing calls through a data set connected with conventional telephone central offices.
When used on a private line service, two methods may be used:
1, With a Call Control Unit (cable connectors must have jumpered plugs and connectors)
2. Without a Call Control Unit, an Electrical Service Unit is used to connect directly to the signal line.
SEND-RECFIVE PAGE PRINTER SET
The KSR set provides facilities for originating messages for transmission by the manual operation of a keyboard and for receiving and printing messages, whether origineted locally or remotely, on a page-width copy paper.
Consists of a Keyboard, Printer Assembly, Motor, Call Control Assembly, Sub-Base and Cover.
RECEIVE-ONLY PAGE PRINTER SET
The RO set provides facilities for receiving messages and printing them on page-width copy paper.
Consists of the same components as the KSR except the Keyboard is blank and has no facilities for transmission,
AUTOMATIC SEND-RECEIVE SET 
The ASR set provides facilities for originating messages for transmission by either the manual operation of a keyboard or the reading of perforated paper tape. It provides facilities for recording messages, whether originated locally or remotely, by perforating them in tape and/or printing them on page-width copy paper. The ASR sets may be used in the following ways:
1, To transmit messages from the keyboard while making a printed page copy with or without perforating tape.
2. To receive messages from line and print them on page copy with or without perforating tape.
3, To locally perforate messages in tape from keyboard for later transmission while making a printed page copy.
4, To transmit messages from tape while making a page copy with or without perforating tape. The basic ASR sets include the same components as the KSR with the addition of a tape reader and a tape punch, which mount on the left side of the keyboard and printer.
CALL CONTROL UNIT
Contains six pushbuttons - illuminated
Answer - Station goes off hook, into connect condition.
Clear - Stations disconnect, go on hook (idle).
Originate - Used to initiate a call {
Test - Connects output of data set back to input :
Local - Automatic answering facilities are disabled i
Buzzer Release - Stops buzzer, sounds on low paper condition,
Also contains two printed circuit cards, a Selector Magnet Driver and Speaker Amplifier.
Contains a Ringer which is adjustable and a Speaker which monitors the progress of the dialed call, A transformer supplying 48, 14, and 19V A.C. and a diode rectifier for the selector magnet driver.
Contains:
A restrain amber lamp.
A combination break release push button switch with a white lamp.
An out of service white lamp.
An out of service turn switch with a normal position and a spring return restore position.
The call control unit, when used with the 101C Data Set, is connected with conventional telephone central offices having the required routing and message accounting equipment. These are generally the same offices and equipment serving telephone customers in the area, Direct current signals are used for both originating and terminating traffic, providing the same conditions as for conventional local telephone set operation, The dial on the set, for initiation of call connections, may be either a d.c, pulsing or multi-frequency tone device.
The elapsed time indicator is mounted at the rear of the call control unit. It provides a means of logging hours for maintenance purposes, by logging the total number of motor operating hours. The lapsed time indicator is not resetable.
It is easily installed and has two electrical leads; one goes to the motor control relay, the other to the power transformer.

"Hindsight: the ability to see how a mistake looks from the rear"

33 KEYBOARD
PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION

Transmission of messages is accomplished by an operator selectively depressing the keys and spacebar of the keyboard in the same manner as in typing. The downward movement of each key or the space-bar is translated by a codebar mechanism into mechanical arrangement corresponding to the code combination representing the character on the keytop. The mechanical arrangements set up the code combinations in a set of keyboard con= tacts, and, by parallel output, the code combinations are transmitted to a distributor mechanism. A universal mechanism trips adistributor clutch, and a distributor mechanism then translates the parallel output from the keyboard contacts into corresponding start-stop signal for application to the transmission facilities,
One set of code bars are associated with each code element. Depressing a KEYLEVER (1) engages tine driving CODE BAR (2, down, T-LEVERS (3) at each end connected by TIE LINK (4) rotate, guiding the other bar up.
Front code bar down, T-levers rotate clockwise.
Rear code bar down, T-levers rotate counterclockwise.
As T-LEVERS (3) rotate, they will affect the CONTACT WIRES (S). The tine arrangement will prevent simultaneoud selection of more than one keylever.

"Light travels at an amazing speed until it hits the human mind"

5.05 The clutch drums are attached to and rotate with the main shaft (Fig. 9). In the disengaged position, as shown in Fig. 1, the clutch shoes do not contact the drum, and the shoes and cam disk are held stationary.' Engagement is accomplished by moving the stop arm (Fig. 12) toward the rear of the typing unit, away from the clutch, thus releasing stop lug A and the lower end of shoe lever B (Fig. 12). The upper end of lever B pivots about its ear C, which bears against the upper end of the secondary shoe and moves its ear D and the upper endof the primary shoe toward the left until the shoe makes contact with the notched inner surface of the rotating drum at point E. As the drum turns counterclockwise, it drives the primary shoe downward so that it again makes contact with the drum at point F, There, the combined forces acting on the primary shoe cause it to push against the secondary shoe at point G. The lower end of the secondary shoe then bears against the drum at point I. The forces involved are multiplied at each of the preceding steps. The aggregate force is applied through the shoes to the lug J on the clutch cam disk, and the disk and attached cam turn in unison with the drum.
5.06 Disengagement is effected when the lower end of shoe lever B strikes the stop arm. Lug A and the lower end of the shoe lever are brought together (Fig. 11), and the upper end of lever B pivots about its ear C and allows its other ear D to move toward the right. The upper spring then pulls the two shoes together and away from the drum. The latch lever seats in the Indent in the cam disk, and the cam is held in its stop position until the cluteh is again engaged.

The SHIFT KEY is used to generate PRINTING code combinations for characters appearing on upper keytops.
Three (3) double-headed T-LEVERS (1) are operated as SHIFT KEY (2) is depressed.
Two (2) contact wires are positioned on each T-Lever, altering the (Wo. 5) logic circuit from a (mark to space) or (space to mark). The (No. 8) logic circuit is inverted simultaneously to meet even parity.

The CONTROL KEY is used to generate NON-PRINTING CONTROL code combinations appearing on upper keytops, and also various other control combinations not appearing on keytops.
Depression of CONTROL KEY (1) operates one (1) double-headed T-LEVER (2) and the rear bar of (No. 6) CODE BAR SET (3). Two (2) CONTROL CONTACTS (4) are positioned to invert the (No. 7) code element from (mark to space). No. 6 code element is driven spacing. The (No, 8) logic circuit is inverted simultaneously to meet even parity.
Depression of CONTROL and SHIFT KEYS simultaneously with primary keys, K, L, M, 0, P, will provide special NON-PRINTING CONTROL FUNCTIONS.

"The customer is always right, especially if you are the customer"

PARALLEL OUTPUT CIRCUITS
MODEL 33 KEYBOARD
See the following General System Practices for related keyboard information:
Az 574-121-100 -- Principles of Operation
B. 574-121-700 -- Adjustments
€. 574-121-701 -- Lubrication
D. 574-121-702 -- Disassembly and Reassembly
E. 574-121-800 -- Parts

TYPING UNIT
3.05 The typing unit receives start-stop signals from the call control unit and uses them to control mechanical motions which print the messages, perform functions, and, in the case of the ASR, perforate tape.
3.06 The principal components of the typing unit include the following:
(a) A main shaft which receives motion from the drive parts and distributes it to the various mechanisms through three (four) internal expansion clutches.
Note: Friction feed typing units have three elutches. Sprocket feed typing units have four clutches.
(b) A selector mechanism which translates the start-stop signals to corresponding mechanical arrangements that control a codebar mechanism. A range finder permits the selector to be adjusted so as to sample the signals at the most favorable time.
(c) A codebar mechanism which controls printing, functions, and, in the case of the ASR, tape perforation,
(4) A printing carriage which prints the messages on the paper. The characters are embossed on the cylindrical surface of a typewheel. The typewheel is positioned rotationally and vertically to select the proper characters, and a hammer drives it and an inked ribbon against the paper to effect printing. A ribbon mechanism feeds the ribbon and reverses its direction when one of its spools is depleted,
(e) A function mechanism which enables the typing unit to perform functions supplementary to printing. The standard functions are "space," "carriage return," "line feed," "blank," "bell," and (for the 32. typing unit) "letters" (lower case) and "figures" (upper case). Note: In addition, sprocket feed typing units have the function "form-out. "
(f) A paper feed mechanism which positions paper or forms vertically so that the characters are properly located in lines. A platen feeds the paper or forms. A knob permits manual feeding. The mechanism can be adjusted for single or double line feed.
(g) A spacing mechanism which positions the carriage so that the characters are properly located horizontally on the paper. It moves the carriage, which rides on rollers, by a spacing belt, It returns the carriage to the left margin by a carriage return spring. The carriage is pneumatically stopped without shock by a piston and dashpot cylinder arrangement.
(h) A dise and brush type distributor mechanism which converts the positions of the keyboard contacts (3.01 (c)) to start-stop signals for application to transmission facilities. 
Note: An answer-back mechanism, which is an optional accessory, often is used in conjunction with the distributor. It will automatically transmit a sequence of characters for station identification, It may be coded to transmit any sequence of up to 20 characters and may be actuated locally or remotely,

"Few things are as bad as enthusiastic ignorance"

Distributor Mechanism
2.12 The distributor mechanism receives the parallel output of the keyboard contacts which have been mechanically arranged into code combinations and converts it to start-stop signals and applies them to the signal line. The mechanism receives rotary motion from a distributor gear pulley attached to the drum of a distributor clutch. The clutch disc is connected to a distributor shaft. A brush holder mounted on the shaft carriestwo carbon brushes which are electrically connected by a spring and ride on an inner and outer disc, respectively. The discs are part of a printed circuit card that provides facilities for interconnecting the distributor with other apparatus. The outer disc is divided into segments—ten for 33 typing units, seven for 32 typing units, The segments correspond to the elements of the teletypewriter code.
Selector Trip Mechanism
Spacing start pulse is received. MAGNET COIL (1) de-energizes, ARMATURE (2) moves left unattracted. START LEVER (3) travels up carrying associated START CAM FOLLOWER LEVER (4) into START CAM (5) indent. Attached TRIP LEVER SHOE LEVER (7), engaging CLUTCH (8). As CLUTCH (8) begins to rotate, START CAM FOLLOWER LEVER (4) rides out of START CAM (5) indent, moving START LEVER (3) down away from ARMATURE TRIP LEVER (6) returns into path of SHOE LEVER (7) moves up freeing CLUTCH.

"Be interested in the future; you'll spend the rest of your life there."

Marking Condition ( Current): MAGNET COIL (1) energizes, ARMATURE (2) is attracted. SELECTOR LEVER (3) (selected condition). SELECTOR LEVER (3) rides out of indent driving PUSH LEVER (5) down, pivoting BLOCKING LEVER (6) up.
Spacing Condition (No-Current): MAGNET COIL (1) de-energizes, ARMATURE (2) moves to rear, blocking SELECTOR LEVER (3) from entering CAM indent (4). PUSH LEVER (5) fails to undertravel SELECTOR LEVER (3) (unselected condition). BLOCKING LEVER (6) remains down.
SPACING LOCK LEVER
CAM INDENT
When sampling a spacing code element, the SPACING LOCK LEVER (1) rides into CAM INDENT (2), locking the ARMATURE (3) in unattracted position,
When sampling a marking code element, the ARMATURE (3) blocks the SPACING LOCK LEVER (1) from entering into its CAM INDENT (2). The selector lever action will lock the armature in attracted position.

"Some folks are like buttons — always popping off."

STRIPPER BAIL CAM (1) operates STRIPPER BAIL FOLLOWER ARM (2), moving PUSH LEVER (3) forward. Previously selected PUSH LEVERS (3) move up, freeing their BLOCKING LEVERS (4) to pivot down.

"What we see depends mainly on what we look for."

Moving the POINTER (1) along RANGE SCALE (2) alters the position of the CLUTCH TRIP LEVER (3), This action determines where the selector begins and ends its cycle. It also alters the various cams in respect to their associated levers. This determines the time in which a code element is sampled.
Codebar Mechanism
As clutch begins cycle, CODE BAR RESET LEVER (1) follows CAM SURFACE (2) permitting CODE BAR RESET BATL (3) to pivot counter-clockwise.
CODE BARS (4) move up and to the left t» sense BLOCKING LEVERS (5). Late in clutch cycle, CAM (2) operates CODE BAR RESET LEVER pivoting CODE BAR RESET BAIL (3) clockwise. CODE BARS (4) are reset down and to the right.

"Trouble: a valuable experience that hasn't happened yet"

As Function Clutch begins cycle, eccentric DRIVE LINK is operated, drawing the CARRIAGE DRIVE BAIL (2) to the rear. Midway through clutch cycle, the DRIVE LINK (1) returns the CARRIAGE DRIVE BAIL (2) forvard.
This action directs motion into the print carriage and spacing mechanism.
Vertical Positioning Mechanism
CARRIAGE DRIVE BAIL (1) travels to the rear, POWER BAIL (2) pivots clockwise, transferring motion to through a VERTICAL DRIVE SPRING, VERTICAL DRIVE BAIL (3), DRIVE ARM (5), shaft (6), and TYPEWHEEL (7) are raised until VERTICAL DRIVE BAIL (3) encounters one of three STOP ARMS (8). No. 5 and No. 7 SLIDES (9) follow No, 5 and No. 7 CODE BARS to pivot STOP ARMS (8) in or out of VERTICAL DRIVE BAIL (3) path. Common stop arm follows the movement of No. 5 or No. 7 slide or both.

Rotary Positioning Mechanism (No. 4) slide (1) follows (NO. 4) CODE BARD (2), operating LINKAGE (3), moving the ROTARY DRIVE ARM (4) up to engage RIGHT RACK (5) or down to engage LEFT RACK (6).
Selected rack is pulled forward as DRIVE BAIL (7) rotates POWER BAIL (8) clockwise, transferring motion through ROTARY DRIVE SPRING (9) into ROTARY DRIVE BAIL (10).
Right rack forvard, right typewheel rotates clockwise.
Left rack forward, right typewheel rotates counterclockwise.

"It takes a lot of endurance to make up for bad judgment"

Movement of three CODE BARS (6) will control the positioning of four SLIDES (5).
Common stop slide follows No. 2 or No. 3 stop slide or both. Slides positioned upward will present an opening for the rack to pass through.
Slides remaining down, will block rack moverent.
Typewheel rotation will correspond to the amount of rack movement,

"The greatest undeveloped territory in the world is under your hat"

DRIVE BAIL
As cycle begins, DRIVE BAIL (1) moves up to the rear, POWER BAIL (2) pivots up delivering counterclockwise motion into PRINT BAIL G) through t LINK (4), Motion of PRINT BAIL @) draws LINK (5) down, rotating two RESET ARMS (6) counterclockwise, Two GUIDE PLATES (7) which house stop slides, move tovard $1 PLATE (8) under spring tension Late in cycle, as DRIVE BAIL (1) moves forward, RESET ARMS (6) return GUIDE PLATES (7) and slides forward.
RESET ARM
GUIDE PLATES (1) housing slides, are released by RESET ARMS (2) and begin moving to the rear under spring tension. A RACK (3) is operated to the rear, pushing the assembly rearward until No. 1 Slide (4) (shift slide) engages the STOP PLATE (5) on one of two stop surfaces.
The position of No. 1 slide (up or down) will determine which row (odd or even) is selected on the typewheel.
No. 1 slide down, the front stop surface of stop plate is engaged, limiting the rack putput to select the odd rows.
No. 1 slide up, the rear stop surface of stop plate is engaged increasing the rack output to select the even rows.

"Don't stop thinking; just stop and think"

POWER BAIL (1) moves up transferring clockwise motion into PRINT BAIL (2), through LINK (3), Motion of PRINT BALL (2) moves RESET ARM (4) up, and draws LINK (5) down, rotating RESET ARM (6) clockwise.
RESET ARM (6) engages and pivots the TRIP LEVER (7) counterclockwise to release HAMMER BAIL (8). HAMMER BAIL (8) snaps rearward driving TYPEWHEEL (9) against the ribbon and paper. Motion in mechanism is reversed as POSER PAIL (1) returns down. RESET ARM (4) will rotate HAMMER BAIL (8) counterclockwise until latched by TRIP LEVER (7).
As clutch cycle begins, FUNCTION FOLLOWER ARM (1) moves down counterclockwise. FUNCTION DRIVE LINKAGE (4) pivots, raising the FUNCTION BAIL (5). FUNCTION LEVERS (6) move up to sense the coded projections of CODE BARS (7), Various code bar arrangements permit a function lever to engage a FUNCTION PAWL (8) (selected). Unselected levers are blocked by code bar projections.
Midway through clutch cycle, ROCKER SHAFT (3) rotates clockwise BAIL (5) and FUNCTION LEVERS (6) down. A selected PAWL (8) will be operated down also.

"One way to avoid the monotony of a job is to improve it"

As funtcion clutch begins cycle, STRIPPER DRIVE ARM (1) operates counterclockwise, STRIPPER BAIL (2) moves forward, allowing function action to occur.
Late in clutch cycle, STRIPPER DRIVE ARM (1) operates clockwise, STRIPPER BAIL (2) returns to the rear, disengaging selected FUNCTION PAWL (3) from FUNCTION LEVER (4).
Paper Feed Mechanism (Friction Feed)
FUNCTION ROCKER SHAFT (1) rotates counterclockwise raising LINE FEED ARM (2). As ROCKER SHAFT (1) rotates, LINE FEED FUNCTION LEVER (3) is selected, and lifts the LINE FEED BLOCKING LEVER (4), ROCKER SHAFT (1) rotates clockwise, operating LINE FEED ARM (2) down, driving latched BLOCKING LEVER (4) down. BLOCKING LEVER (4) pulls DRIVE LINK (5) down, operating LINKAGE (6) which pulls PAWL (7) down, rotating PLATEN (8) counterclockwise.

"An experienced wife - one who gets the last word in first"

Printing Cycle:
Function Clutch cams PRINT SUPPRESSION LATCH (1) clockwise, releasing the P. S. CODE BAR (2). P. S. CODE BAR (2) movement operates the P. S. SLIDE (3), pivoting the P. S. LATCH LEVER (4) ' clockwise to unlatch the PRINT HANMER BAIL (5).
Non-Printing Cycle
Each time the printer is conditioned for a function operation, printing will be suppressed, As Function Clutch cycles and $. Latch (1) to release the P. S$. CODE BAR (2), a selected FUNCTION LEVER (6) moves upward into the corresponding pivots the P. tines of the P. S. CODE BAR (2), providing a second blocking condition. The P. S. CODE BAR (2), SLIDE (3), and LATCH LEVE! remain unoperated. PRINT HAMMER BAIL (5) remains latched. CARRIAGE DRIVE BAIL (1) and attached ROLLER (2) move to the rear, allowing FEED PAWL (3) to select a new tooth on RATCHET (4). CARRIAGE DRIVE BAIL (1) and ROLLER (2) move forward, driving FEED PAWL (3) to advance RATCHET (4), PULLEY (5), BELT (6), and As carriage approaches end of platen, END-OF-LINE CLAMP (8) engages END-OF-LINE LEVER (9), which blocks TOGGLE LINK (10), preventing additional FEED PAWL (3) action.

"Half empty to the pessimist is half full to the optimist"

4. Space Function and Space-Suppression Mechanism
Printing Cycle:
Print suppression CODE BAR (1) moves left, pivoting SPACE SUPPRESSION LATCH (2). The FEED PAWL (3) will operate and space the carriage one unit.
Non-printing Cycle:
N CODE BAR qa) is held by a function lever. TCH (2) blocks FEED PAWL (3) action. Spacing action is suppressed.
On space code combination, the space FUNCTION LEVER (4) is selected, holding PRINT SUPPRESSION CODE BAR (1) to the right. As space FUNCTION LEVER (4) moves up, SPACE LINKAGE (5) operates forward, pivoting the space lever (6) to move SPACE SUPPRESSION.
LATCH (2) away from the FEED PAWL (3). Spacing will occur. CARRIAGE RETURN FUNCTION LEVER (1), is selected, and engages FUNCTION PAWL (2). FUNCTION PAWL (2) is operated down, driving ACTUATING LEVER (3) down. CARRIAGE RETURN LINKAGE (4) is operated to the rear, pivoting CARRIAGE RETURN LEVER (5) ifting the FEED AND CHECK PAWL (6) from the SPACING RATCHET (7). As SPRING (8) returns CARRIAGE (9) to the left, PISTON (10) enters DASHPOT (11). LOBE PLATE (12) strikes UNLATCH LEVER (13) which operates the CARRIAGE RETURN LATCH (14), freeing the CARRIAGE RETURN LEVER (15).
UNLATCHING

"A driver is a former pedestrian out for revenge"

As printer begins another printing cycle, CARRIAGE DRIVE BAIL (1) with attached ROLLER (2), move to the rear. ~ - As FEED PAWL (3) follows ROLLER (2), it engages CARRIAGE RETURN ARM (4), which operates the LEVER LATCH (5), freeing the CARRIAGE RETURN LEVER (6). Feed Paul and check pavl return to spacing ratchet.
As FEED PAWL (6) moves forward on next cycle, its EXTENSION (5) strikes the REVERSING ARM EXTENSION (4), and pivots toward the opposite RATCHET (7). As FEED PAWL (6) pivots, it strikes an EXTENSION (8) of the CHECK PAWL (9) moving the check pawl to the opposite ratchet.
ANSWER-BACK MECHANISM
An answer-back mechanism automatically transmits a predetermined sequence of characters for identification purposes, The basic mechanism may be actuated in two ways:
(a) Remotely, by the reception of a predetermined call character.
(b) Locally by the depression of the HERE-IS key.
(c) In addition, as an optional feature, it may be actuated by a trip-magnet mechanism at the receipt of a signal generated by external equipment, such as a data set. The mechanism is described in the appropriate description section,
A drum is coded with characters making up the answer-back sequence. When the answer-back mechanism is actuated, it rotates the drum, which sets up the code combinations in a set of answer-back contacts, The distributor converts the positions of the contacts to start-stop signals for transmission. After the answer-back sequence has been transmitted, the answer-back mechanism returns itself to its unoperated condition, For operational considerations that will be described below, provisions are made for shunting the signal line during sensing of the first answer-back character of each cycle of operation and for preventing the answer-back mechanism from being actuated by the local generation of the answer-back call character,
Note: See the appropriate installation section for further information on answer-back drum coding.
TRIP BAIL
Depression of KEYLEVER (1) operates BELL CRANK (2) down, TRIP LINK (3) moves forward rotating CONTROL LEVER (4) clockwise out of indent in start cam. LEVER (6) to the rear engaging distributor clutch.
As clutch cycle begins, ROLLER (7) allows FEED LEVER (8) to move up, operating the FEED PAWL (9) to the rear to select a new tooth on ratchet. Late in clutch eycle, ROLLER (7) drives FEED LEVER (8) down, pulling FEED PAWL (9) forward, advancing DRUM one unit. Contact wires sense tines on drum as it is rotated. This action continues until CONTROL LEVER (4) finds an indent in start cam.

"Success is nothing but a good idea coupled with hard work"

CONTROL LEVER
Printer is conditioned by a remote station for Answer Back function. As FUNCTION BAIL (1) raises, the A. B. FUNCTION LEVER (2) moves up and is latched by A. B, PAWL (3). FUNCTION BAIL (1) and FUNCTION LEVER (2) return down, pulling A. B PAWL (3) down to operate A. B. BAIL (4). As A. B. BAIL (4) pivots, TRIP LINK (5) moves forward rotating the CONTROL LEVER (6) clockwise to initiate the A. B. feed and sensing action.
Originating (WRU) on local keyboard activates the local distributor, which transmits to the local printer and a remote station simultaneously. Only the remote stations Answer Back should respond,
Local Blocking Action:
As the local distributor clutch cycles, BLOCKING CAM (1) rotates clockwise, driving BLOCKING FOLLOWER LEVER (2) down. BLOCKING LINK (3) moves toward the rear pulling BLOCKING PAWL (4) rearward. aie Bidar BLOCKING LATCH LEVER (5) moves up, holding the BLOCKING PAWL (4) in position, BLOCKING PAWL EXTENSION (6) blocks the A. B. FUNCTION LEVER (7) as it tries to operate. A. B. BAIL (8) remains unoperated and the local A. B. mechanism fails to respond.

"Diplomacy is the art of letting someone else have your way"

Current is applied to Answer Back coil. (Connect) ARMATURE (1) with EXTENSION (2) is attracted downward. BLOCKING LATCH (3) is pivoted clockwise and undertravels EXTENSION (2). TRIP LEVER (4) overtravels EXTENSION (2). Trip lever tab drives CONTROL LEVER (5) clockwise. - "DISTRIBUTOR CLUTCH (6) engages, drum rotation begins. Late in first clutch cycle, BLOCKING CAM (7) is rocked forward to clear the EXTENSION (2) and to release CONTROL LEVER (5). BLOCKING LATCH (3) pivots up to hold TRIP LEVER (4) forward. Drum rotation continues until an indent is presented to CONTROL LEVER (5). Current is removed from coil. (Disconnect) ARMATURE (1) with EXTENSION (2) moves up to hold TRIP LEVER (4).
Answer back contacts are wired in parallel with distributor segments.
Answer back contacts are wired in parallel with distributor segments.
CONTACT SPRINGS (1) sense TINES (2) on drum as it rotates, Where no tine exists, the CONTACT SPRING (1) moves in against TERMINAL BAR (3) completing circuit path to a segment (marking). Where a tine exists, the CONTACT SPRING (1) is blocked and does not toucn TERMINAL BAR G6) (s acing).
The removal of a suppression tine in any character row, permits the SUPPRESSION CONTACT (4) to close, during the sensing sequence of that character row.
With contact closed, a current condition exists on signal loop, blinding the (start) and (intelligence) elements being transmitted. Suppression can also be used to eliminate coding errors or surplus rows on drum.

MODEL 33 PRINTER
See the following General System Practices for related printer information:
574-122-100 -- Principles of Operation
574-122-700 -- Adjustments
574-122-701
574-122-702
574-122-800 -- Parts
Lubrication
Disassembly and Reassembly

TAPE PUNCH
The tape punch, in conjunction with the selector and codebar mechanisms on the typing unit, provides facilities for perforating messages in paper tape. The messages are received as start-stop signals from the call control unit and are converted to mechanical motions that punch corresponding code holes in the tape.
The punch includes the following components:
(a) A drive mechanism which receives motion from the function rocker shaft on the typing unit and distributes it to other mechanisms.
(b) An intelligence-transfer mechanism which receives intelligence from the codebar mechanism on the typing unit.
(c) A tape-punching mechanism which, under the control of the intelligence-transfer mechanism, perforates feed and code holes in the tape by means of punch pins located in a holder.
(d) A tape feed and guide mechanism that advances the tape by means of rollers and a feed pawl and ratchet arrangement.
(e) A base casting which is attached to the typing unit base and provides mounting facilities for the various mechanisms.
(f) A supply reel which accommodates a roll of blank tape.
(g) A pan casting and 2-piece plastic cover which provides a protective and decorative enclosure for the tape punch.
(h) A metallic chad container which collects the paper (chad) punched out by punch pins.

The following four pushbuttons are provided:
(a) ON - Turns the tape punch on.
(b) OFF - Turns the tape punch off.
(c) REL (Release) - Releases the tape feed and guide mechanism so that tape can be easily removed from the tape punch.
(d) B. SP. (Backspace) - Backspaces tape one combination of code holes, The tape punch receives drive morion from the printer's function rocker shaft.

"Elephants and mistreated customers have long memories"

Three distinct movements occur with each cycle of operation. Counterclockwise rotation of ROCKER SHAFT (1), operates DRIVE LINK (2) to the rear, DRIVE LINK (2) acts on DRIVE POST (3) to rock the POWER BAIL (4) to the rear.
Clockwise rotation of ROCKER SHAFT (1) operates DRIVE LINK (2) forward, rocking POWER BAIL (4) forward.
A slight counterclockwise rotation of ROCKER SHAPT (1) returns POWER BAIL (4) upright and all motion terminates.
ON and OFF pushbuttons are located in tape punch lid. The depression of ON button drives the forward half of TRANSFER LEVER (1) down, drawing CONTROL LINK (2) up. CONTROL LEVER (3) rotates counterclockwise where it is held by DETENT LEVER (4). A ROLLER (5) attached to CONTROL LEVER (3) allows DRIVE LINK (6) to move down and engage DRIVE POST (7).

"Just when you make both ends meet, somebody moves the ends"

Intelligence arranged in printer code bars is transferred through extensions into the tape punch.
Each EXTENSION (1) contains a tab on its underside which is associated with a SENSING LEVER. (2) CODE BAR (3) held right, tab remains over sensing lever.
CODE BAR (4) shifted left, removes tab from over sensing lever. Function clutch engages, function rocker shaft begins rotating. DRIVE LINK (5) moves rearward, rocking POWER BAIL (6) to the rear. SENSING BAIL (7) raises, allowing SENSING LEVERS (2) to pivot up and sense EXTENSIONS (1). Those which do not encounter tab, move up. Those blocked by tab, remain down.
A SENSING LEVER (1) which moves up, selects and latches a PAWL (2). The DRIVE LINK (3) begins moving forward rocking POWER BAIL (4) forward. SENSING BAIL (5) is operated down, driving SENSING LEVER (7) (1) with latched PAWL (2) down, T-SHAPED LEVER (6) rotates counterclockwise, forcing PUNCH PIN (7) through paper tape which rests in DIE BLOCK (8).

"Instead of the tricks of the trade, why not learn the trade?"

As DRIVE LINK (1) moves forward to punch tape, a STRIPPER BAIL (2) is operated forward and through its bias spring it engages a latching surface on the underside of the PAWL (3).
Also, a cam profile directs counterclockwise motion into the NUDGER (4) which gently nudges the tape to index the tape roll a small amount. (frees tape)
DRIVE LINK (1) returns slightly rearward and STRIPPER BAIL (2) strips latched PAWL (3) from SENSING LEVER (5). Pawl, T-shaped lever, and punch pin return to their unoperated position, and all action terminates.

"Some people try to hold a job by sitting on it."

As a cycle begins, the POWER BAIL (1) rocks to the rear and operates the FEED PAWL (2) to act on the RATCHET WHEEL (3). This action rotates FEED WHEEL (4) to advance tape one tenth of an inch.
A DETENT MECHANISM (5) holds RATCHET WHEEL (3) in its operated position.
Midway through cycle, the forward movement of POWER BAIL (1) operates FEED PAWL (2) forward to select a new tooth on
Feed Wheel Mechanism (Tape Feed Mechanism)
Backspace button on tape punch lid is depressed, driving BACKSPACE LEVER (1) down.
Two actions occur simultaneous]y: An ARM (2) on BACKSPACE LEVER (1) engages and rotates the RATCHET (3) and attached FEED WHEEL (4) in a counterclockwise direction, drawing the tape back one unit. Also, an associated LEVER (5) is pivoted to move the FEED PAWL (6) away from RATCHET (3).

"The only people who never fail are those who never try"

A tension spring (1) serves to hold the KNURLED ROLLER (2) against the FEED WHEEL (3) as TAPE (4) is fed through.
This combination provides adequate tape spacing. (Ten holes per inch.)
Depression of REL button on punch lid, pushes down on RELEASE LEVER (5), disengaging KNURLED ROLLER (2) from FEED WHEEL (3). Easy tape insertion or removal is thereby attained.

MODEL 33 TAPE PUNCH
See the following General System Practices for additional information on the tape punch:
574-125-100 -- Principles of Operation
574-125-700 -- Adjustments
574-125-701 -- Lubrication
574-125-702 -- Disassembly and Reassembly
574-125-800 -- Parts

TAPE READER
The tape reader, in conjunction with the distributor mechanism on the typing unit, provides facilities for transmitting messages from perforated tape.
The complete tape reader package includes the following components:
(a) A tape-sensing mechanism which converts code holes in the tape to corresponding positions in a set of contact springs. The holes are sensed by pins which operate the contact springs. The positions of the contact springs are converted to start-stop signals by the distributor mechanism.
(b) A feed mechanism which advances the tape after a combination of code holes has been read, A feed pawl and ratchet arrangement rotates a feed wheel whose pins engage feed holes in the tape. The tape feeds from rear to front and is held down on the sensing pins and feed wheel by a hinged tape lid which may be opened to facilitate tape threading.
(c) A feed magnet and armature arrangement which supplies motion for the sensing and feed mechanisms, It is pulsed by a contact on the distributor mechanism.
(d) A magnet-controlled clutch-trip mechanism which actuates the distributor mechanism. It is mounted above the distributor on the typing unit.
(e) A power pack, mounted in the enclosure of the stand, which provides current rectification for the feed magnet. It is protected by a metal housing.
(f) A cable which interconnects the tape reader with the power pack, the magnet pulsing contact, and the call control unit.
(g) Tape-out and tight-tape mechanisms which will stop the tape reader when it runs out of tape or when the tape becomes taut.
(h) A free-wheeling mechanism which disengages the feed wheel and tape-out mechanisms and permits the tape to be moved freely through the tape reader.
(i) A frame which is mounted on the typing unit's subbase and provides mounting facilities for the other mechanisms, excluding the power pack and clutch-trip mechanism.
(j) A base casting and plastic cover which provide a protective and decorative enclosure for the tape reader.
(k) The auxiliary ASR power supply is mounted in the enclosure of the stand It is used in the off-line mode, to provide 115 volts on the tape reader, keyboard, answer-back, and distributor contacts only when a tape reader is used. When the tape reader is not used, a dummy plug with a jumper wire is inserted in position "R2" at the rear of the call control unit.

"Conscience: the thing that hurts when everything else feels good"

CONTACT WIRES (1) and CONTROL CONTACT (2) are wired in series with DISTRIBUTOR CLUTCH TRIP COIL (3) and power source. The three positions for CONTROL LEVER (4) are START, STOP, and FREE. Operating CONTROL LEVER (4) to START Allows CONTACT WIRES (1) to move down and touch CONTROL CONTACT (2). TRIP COIL (3) becomes energized. Operating to STOP, CONTACT WIRES (1) are lifted by CONTROL LEVER (4). Circuit opens, TRIP COIL (3) de-energizes.
A taut or twisted tape entering the tape reader, will pivot the TIGHT TAPE BAIL (5) upward. The TIGHT TAPE BAIL (5) engages and rotates a TIGHT TAPE LEVER (6) counterclockwise.
An EXTENSION (7) on TIGHT TAPE LEVER (6) raises, lifting CONTACT WIRES (1) from CONTROL CONTACT (2). TRIP COIL (3) de-energizes.

"Drive carefully. The life you save may be mine"

With TAPE (1) in reader, and TAPE LID (2) closed, the TAPE OUT PIN (3) is held down. CONTACT WIRES (4) make with CONTROL CONTACT (5). Trip coil is energized.
Operating TAPE LID LATCH (6), TAPE LID (2) swings open. TAPE OUT PIN (3) moves up allowing its EXTENSION (7) to raise CONTACT WIRES (4) from CONTROL CONTACT (5). Trip coil de-energizes Also, as TAPE OUT PIN (3) senses the end of a tape, it raises and Lifts CONTACT WIRES (4) from CONTROL CONTACT (5).
FEED MAGNET CONTACTS (1) are wired in series with READER FEED MAGNET COIL (2) and power source. TRIP COIL (3) is energized. ARMATURE (4) with EXTENSION (5) is attracted down, READER TRIP LEVER (6) overtravels EXTENSION (5). becomes energized. Also, READER TRIP LEVER (6) operates TRIP BAIL (7) and attached TRIP LEVER (8) to the rear, engaging DISTRIBUTOR CLUTCH (9). Sensing and transmission begins.
Late in clutch cycle, a ROLLER (10) cams READER TRIP LEVER (6) forward. FEED MAGNET CONTACTS (1) open and FEED MAGNET COIL (2) de-energizes.

"It's easy finding reasons why other folks should be patient"

FEED MAGNET COIL (1) energizes attracting ARMATURE (2). ARMATURE EXTENSIONS (3) and attached SENSING PIN GUIDE (4) are raised. SENSING PINS (5) with attached INSOLATORS (6) attempt to follow SENSING PIN GUIDE (4) up.
Where a hole exists in the tape, a sensing pin and attached CONTACT SPRING (7) against the TERMINAL insulator move up, raising BAR (8) (marking).
Where no hole exists in the tape, the sensing pin is blocked and the CONTACT SPRING (7) remains down (spacing).
All movement is reversed as armature moves to unattracted position. A spring loaded upstop is provided to accelerate the armature release action and also the retraction of sensing pins. A resilient buffer is provided to reduce noise.

"He who throws mud loses ground"

Early in cycle, FEED MAGNET COIL (1) energizes and attracts ARMATURE (2), As Armature EXTENSIONS 93) raise, an attached
FEED PAWL (4) moves up to select a new tooth on RATCHET (5). Late in cycle, FEED MAGNET COIL (1) de-energizes, allowing ARMATURE EXTENSIONS (3) to return down. FEED PAWL (4) is pulled down.
When operating CONTROL LEVER (1) from STOP to FREE, the TAPEOUT PIN @) is cammed down,
Also, an EXTENSION (3) on CONTROL LEVER (1) engages and rotates BLOCKING PAWL (4) to lift FEED PAWL 6) away from RATCHET (8). Tape may be repositioned in readerwithout opening tape lid.

BASIC READER CIRCUITRY
Control CONTACT (1) closes, energizing CLUTCH TRIP COIL (2). CLUTCH TRIP LEVER (3) pivots, closing FEED MAGNET CONTACTS (4). FEED MAGNET COIL (5) energizes and sensing action occurs.
READER CONTACTS (6) transmit a parallel output to DISTRIBUTOR (7). DISTRIBUTOR (7) transmits serial start-stop signal on line, to SELECTOR MAGNET COIL (8).

MODEL 33 TAPE READER
See the following General System Practices for additional information on the Type 33 Tape Reader:
A, 574-124-100 -- Principles of Operation
B. 574-124-700 -- Adjustments
C. 574-124-701 -- Lubrication
D. 574-124-701 =~ Disassembly and Reassenbly
E. 574-124-800 -- Parts

CALL CONTROL UNIT
PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION
The function of a call control unit is to couple a teletypewriter either to telegraph networks or, through a data set, to telephone networks. In some applications, the call control unit provides facilities for initiating, accepting, controlling, and completing calls; while in others, it acts as a connecting device only.
The call control unit used in Western Union TELEX service operates over short and intermediate length telegraph loops using neutral signaling or over longer loops with polar signaling when modified with proper polar-to-neutral converting circuitry, It includes a power supply, local-remote control circuits, a selector magnet driver circuit, and a motor delay timer circuit.
The call control unit is used in switched network service. When it is connected with the appropriate data set, it is connected with conventional telephone central offices having the required routing and message accounting equipment. These are generally the same offices and equipment serving telephone customers in the area, Direct current signals are used for both originating and terminating traffic—providing the same conditions as for conventional local telephone set operation, The dial on the call control unit, for initiation of call connections, may be either a DC pulsing or a multifrequency (MF) tone device. Also included in the call control unit are ringing or tone sounding apparatus for alerting the called party. Paragraphs 3.01 through 3.06 outline in general terms the call control unit's overall operation, Paragraphs 3.08 through 3.32 explain its detailed operation, The principal applicable schematic wiring diagram is 5918WD. For additional wiring information, see the pertinent wiring diagrams, associated with the call control unit or, when provided, the appropriate section.
The call control unit used in private wire service operates over short or intermediate length telegraph loops using neutral DC signaling. It includes a power supply, a selector magnet driver circuit and a power switch.

CALL CONTROL UNIT—SWITCHED NETWORK SERVICE OPERATION
A. General
3.01 The call control unit provides for signaling speeds of 100 wpm from DC marking and spacing intelligence pulses originating from the distributor in the associated teletypewriter, These pulses are directed to the input of the selector magnet driver in the call control unit where they are amplified and returned to the typing unit as 0.500-ampere DC pulses to operate the selector magnet.
3.02 If the originate (ORIG) pushbutton (non-locking) on the call control unit has been depressed and connection with a called station has been satisfactorily completed, the intelligence pulses originated by the distributor are sent to the data set. The data set converts the dc pulses to tone signals for transmission over telephone lines. Another data set, located at the called station, converts the tone signals back to DC pulses, which are directed to the input of the selector magnet driver to operate the selector in the teletypewriter of the called station, The teletypewriter at a given station copies both the transmitted and receivedde signals, operating on a half-duplex basis.
3.03 Although the data set is not a part of this equipment, a brief discussion of its function is necessary to understand the operation of the system, Start-stop DC signal pulses form essentially a square wave which cannot readily be transmitted over telephone lines. The data set is basically a converter which changes the dc signals from the sending or calling station into frequency-shifted tones for transmission over the telephone network. A marking pulse from a sending station is converted to a 1270-cycle marking signal (F) mark) and a spacing pulse becomes a 107C-cycle spacing signal (Fi space). The data set at the receiving or called station sends a 2225-cycle marking signal (F mark) and a 2025-cycle spacing signal (Fz space). During transmission of a message the calling station sends mark and space tones (Fy mark and space) while the called station sends a continuous mark tone (Fg mark). In this way the telephone facilities are operated on a full-duplex basis. If the signal received at either station (F} mark and space at the called station and Hp mark at the calling station) shifts to a space tone for more than one second, or if the received signal is lost for one second, the data set will cause the station to be disconnected. This provides assurance that the connection is maintained for the entire period of message transmission.
3.04 The call control unit used with the data set operates with conventional telephone central offices that have the necessary routing and accounting facilities. In operation, a call is originated by depressing the ORIG pushbutton. A lamp illuminates the pushbutton and the dial tone will be heard through a loudspeaker. If the line is busy, a busy signal will be heard and the clear (CLR) pushbutton (non-locking) should be depressed, If the line is not busy, the operator dials the number of the desired 'station. This causes the called station to go into connect condition, If the teletypewriter is manually operated, the called station operator presses the answer (ANS) pushbutton (non-locking), Following a short interval, about 1-1/2 seconds, in which telephone facilities are connected, the called station transmits a mark tone (Fg) and receives a mark tone (Fj) from the calling station, Receiving the continuous F2 mark tone from the called station for second causes the calling station to go into connect condition, and its motor is turned on, Likewise, the continuous Fy mark tone from the calling station for 1 second causes the called station to go into connect condition, and its motor is turned on. Either station can now transmit.
3.05 At the end of the message, either station may originate a disconnect by depressing the CLR pushbutton, at which time each station goes back to its idle condition, ready to receive or originate other calls. For keyboard practice, maintenance purposes, or preparation of copy, the local mode (LCL) pushbutton (ocking) is depressed. This turns on the motor and disables automatic answering facilities, if present. In the event of an incoming call during local operation, the call control unit responds to ringing signals and the ANS pushbutton must be operated manually. Operation of the test (TST) pushbutton (locking) causes received signals to be retransmitted to the test center for maintenance purposes. A lamp, associated with each pushbutton, illuminates the pushbutton whenever that pushbutton has been operated and the operating condition exists. The ANS lamp is pulsed in response to ringing signals of an incoming call, and lights continuously when the call is answered, The CLR lamp is automatically extinguished 1.5 seconds after the pushbutton has been depressed, and disconnect is completed,
3.06 A steady mark signal blinds the associated teletypewriter during all intervals, except when in the connect condition. This prevents spurious characters from being printed except when due to loss of signals, circuit noise, or deliberate break or space-disconnect signals.

B. Power Requirements
3.07 Power input to the teletypewriter is 115V +10 per cent, 60 cps +2 percent. Average power consumption is 35 watts (not including typing unit motor) with peaks up to 50 watts permitted.
3.08 To originate a call, the ORIG pushbutton is momentarily depressed. This connects the station to the line and lights the ORIG lamp. During the period of time in which connection is being made, the telephone central office makes no time measurements. When the ORIG pushbutton is closed, the call control unit is connected to the telephone line through the data set and an off-hook condition is set up. The amplifier is connected into the circuit so that the dial tone from the central office is heard. The called station is dialed while the amplfier monitors the progress.
3.09 At the called station audible and visible signaling devices are operated. The called station goes off hook and into the connect condition upon operation of the ANS pushbutton circuit, by manual or automatic means, at the distant point, At this time, thereisa nonsignaling interval of 1,225 seconds during which accounting and toll recording facilities at the telephone exchange will be cleared. Following the nonsignaling interval, the called station transmits its Fz mark tone and sets its monitoring timer to respond to the Fj mark tone from the calling station. When the continuous F2 mark tone is received at the calling station for aperiodof 1 second, indicating that a station has answered, it will go into the connect condition and turn on its motor. When the continuous Fy mark tone is received at the called station for an interval of 1 second, it will go into the connect condiion, The station may now acknowledge the call either by operato keyboarding, or by automatic answer-back message transmission, The monitoring timers at both stations are set to respond to reception of a space tone from the distant station. Traffic can now be exchanged from either station on a half-duplex basis.

DISCONNECTING A CALL
3.10 During the time the two stations are connected (traffic interval), either station can initiate a disconnect as follows:
(a) A call is normally terminated by the end-of-transmission (EOT) code combination which provides fast disconnect without introducing hit characters. This is accomplished by the data set in response to EOT contact closures in function boxes of both the sending and receiving teletypewriters.
(b) A call connection can also be cleared manually by momentarily depressing the CLR pushbutton, Operation of the CLR pushbutton at either station will cause transmission of a spacing signal of 1.5 seconds duration, after which the station originating the disconnect will discontinue its tone transmission and go back on hook. The other station, after receiving the spacing signal for 1 second, will automatically transmit its 1.5-seccond spacing signal and then go onhook. Both stations will then be back in their original idle condition in which calls can be either originated or accepted.

ANSWERING A CALL
A, Manual Answering
3.11 To answer a call manually, momentarily depress the ANS pushbutton, This connects the station to the line and lights the ANS lamp. The lamp remains lighted until the answer mode is terminated, Manual answering is necessary only when the automatic answer-back circuit is disabled. The automatic answer-back circuit is disabled by low-paper contacts, data set relay contacts (when in local mode), and the OUT OF SERV. key.
B, Automatic Answering
3.12 Call control units equipped with automatic answering facilities will respond to received ringing signals, turning the teletypewriter on at the end of the ringing interval and proceeding through to the connect condition. Automatic message answer-back is a part of this feature. The presence of an operator is required in order to complete disconnect and return the teletypewriter to idle condition, For unattended service, 'an automatic disconnect timing device (optional) actuated when a call is answered, will cause the teletypewriter to go through the connect condition, send the 1.5-second spacing tone, and go back on hook if the Fy mark tone is not received within 8 seconds after the called station answered. This is designed to prevent the unattended station from being made busy by (telephone) calls that fail to cause a full connection to be set up. This feature does not affect normal automatic disconnect upon receiving the 1-second spacing tone or loss of tones due to a dropoff.
LOCAL MODE
3.13 The local mode (LCL) provides off-line operation of the teletypewriter. The operator selects the local mode by depressing the LCL pushbutton. This lights the LCL lamp and operates the motor control relay (MCR) to energize the motor. The data set connects the sending circuit to the receiving circuit and enables the keyboard and answer-back to transmit. In this condition the teletypewriter can be used for preparing copy, for operator practice, or for maintenance purposes. If an incoming signal is received during this time, ringing signals are received and manual operation of the ANS pushbutton is required in order to receive the message. If the teletypewriter is in a terminal hunting group, the operator must turn the out-of-service (OUT-OF-SERV.) knob to the RESTORE position momentarily and then to NORMAL.

"OUT-OF-SERV." SWITCH
3.14 The OUT OF SERV. switch prevents the automatic answering of incoming calls, In its NORMAL position (arrow on knob upright), it has no effect or function; in the OUT OF SERV, position (knob rotated counterclockwise and detented) it sets the following conditions:
(a) A contact is closed that causes the OUT OF SERV. lamp to light.
(b) A contact is closed that shorts the ringer coils. This makes the ringer inoperative, As an option the contact can be located to shunt both the ringer and series capacitor (ie, the telephone line), This makes the station appear to be in an off-hook condition or busy to the central office.
(c) A contact is opened that breaks the automatic answer circuit to the answer relay. This prevents the relay from operating in response to the ring-up relay and thus the teletypewriter will not answer.
3.15 For stations that are not in terminal hunting groups, the operator may return the teletypewriter to service by turning the OUT OF SERV. knob to the NORMAL position, For terminal hunting stations, however, the operator must turn the knob to the RESTORE position and hold it until a dial tone is heard. In this position:
(a) A contact is closed that shorts the tip to ring (off-hook condition). This condition is detected by the central office which then releases the teletypewriter from lockout and applies the dial tone.
(b) A contact is closed that completes a path from the speaker amplifier to ground, This permits the amplifier to pass the line signals (dial tone).
The OUT OF SERV. switch is then restored to NORMAL.

LOW-PAPER ALARM
3.16 A low-paper alarm is provided in the teletypewriter, When a low-paper condition occurs, make contacts in the low-paper switch provide ground to the low-paper buzzer, permitting it to operate. Depressing the buzzer-release (BUZ-RLS) pushbutton (locking) in the call control unit silences the buzzer and causes the BUZ-RLS lampto light. Attempting to release the pushbutton without replenishing the paper supply will result in the buzzer operating. When the paper has been replenished, the teletypewriter is returned to normal by releasing the BUZ-RLS pushbutton.
3.17 Break contacts on the low-paper switch disable the automatic answer-back circuit, The operator can override this condition by answering manually. If the low-paper alarm occurs during a call the operator has the option of completing the call before changing the paper, or interrupting the call. To interrupt the call, the operator stops transmission by depressing the keyboard BREAK key, and then depressing the BRK-RLS pushbutton to notify the distant station of the problem. The connection is cleared by simultaneously operating the control (CTRL) and EOT keys on the keyboard. Turning the OUT OF SERV. knob to the detent position insures that the teletypewriter will not automatically answer a call while paper is being replenished.
3.18 To restore the teletypewriter to service after the paper has been inserted, depress the CLR pushbutton and return the OUT OF SERV, knob to its NORMAL position. (For teletypewriters in terminal hunting groups, turn the knob to its RESTORE position and hold it there. When dial tone is heard, release the knob.) The teletypewriter is now in a normal idle operating position.

RESTRAIN LAMP
3.19 This high intensity restrain (REST) lamp lights when a restraining signal is received from an 8-level to a 5-level converter used in transmission to 5-level TWX stations on the DDD switching plan. The lamp remains lighted until the restraining signal is removed. The purpose of this feature is to limit the sending speed from 8-level teletypewriter transmitting at 100 wpm to 5-level teletypewriters receiving at 60 wpm.

TEST MODE
3.20 If the TST pushbutton is operated while the teletypewriter is connected to a test center, the message sent by the test center will be recorded on the teletypewriter and turned around and sent back for analysis. This is accomplished by connecting the teletypewriter to the data set through a set of transfer contacts and a break contact to ground. This type of operation can be terminated by momentarily operating any of the nonlocking pushbuttons which will then release the TST locking pushbutton.

SIGNAL GENERATION
3.31 The teletypewriter can send by operating the keyboard, answer-back mechanism, or BREAK key. The keyboard signal generator contacts and answer-back contacts are in parallel with the signal generator (distributor) which is, in turn, connected to the data set. The BREAK key connects to the data set via separate leads.

SELECTOR MAGNET DRIVER
A. General
3.22 The data set supplies a 20-ma DC signal to the selector magnet driver associated with the teletypewriter, The selector magnet driver amplifies the signal to 500mA to operate the selector on the teletypewriter. The selector magnet driver is a2-stage transistorized amplifier capable of switching high output currents (0.500 ampere) at very closely controlled input current levels. The output of the selector magnet driver is automatically regulated and is essentially independent of normal variations in power supply voltage and of selector-magnet and current-limiting resistance values.
B. Circuit Description
3.23 Figure 13 illustrates a schematic drawing of a selector magnet driver circuit.
3.24 Open Line: When the line circuit is open (spacing), transistor Ql will be turned on by the regulated current flowing through Ri into its base. This current, which is controlled by Rl, will be set near the desired switching level. With Ql conducting, Q2 will be cut off, since the potential at the base of Q2 will be more positive than at the emitter. In this condition only small leakage currents will flow in the collector circuit.
3.25 Space-to-Mark Transition: As the space-to-mark transition begins, the negative bias current flowing in the base of Ql is diverted to the line circuit, As the line current rises toward the marking current value, it extracts base current from Ql, When the line current approaches the total current supplied to the base of Q1 to within 0.001 ampere, which is about one-half the nominal mark current value, Ql begins to turn off, Q2 will then begin to receive forward bias current from R8 and begin to turn on, Thebase current will then be amplified by Q2, and a current which is a multiple of the base current will appear in the emitter circuit. This increase in emitter current results in an increase in the negative potential measured across R3. The increase in the negative potential at the emitter of Q1 causes it to go further into cutoff. The feedback process continues until the current in the selector magnet reaches a value which is determined by the Zener reference voltage, clamp diode CR4, and the emitter resistance of Q2 (the emitter resistance of Q2 is adjusted by R4 to compensate for component variations. As the line current completes the transition to the final marking current value, the base of Q1 becomes positively biased. The positive bias current will be approximately one-half the total marking line current, The positive potential to the base of QI is clamped to approximately 0.6 volt by the input protecting varistor, CRS.
3.26 Mark-to-Space Transition: The line current, in changing from mark to space, will finally reach the point where R1 will begin to supply some forward current to the base of Q1. The line current level at which this occurs will be a little more negative than the point at which the circuit switched from space to mark, due to the common emitter resistor voltage feedback. As Q1 begins to turn on, the current through R8 will be diverted from the base of Q2, causing it to begin to turn off, As Q2 turns off, the voltage across R4 will begin to go positive, causing Ql to be further turned on. This effect gives regeneration to the mark-to-space transition.
3.27 Mark-to-Space Switching Transient: When Q2 is turned off during the mark-to-space transition, a negative voltage transient is developed at its collector. This transient is due to dissipation of the energy stored in the magnetic field of the driven magnet when energized by 0.500 ampere. If the high voltage developed at the collector of Q2 were not limited, it would continue to rise until it reaches the point where the collector-to-emitter breakdown, voltage is exceeded. It has been found that repeated breakdown of this kind causes deterioration of the transistor and finally a collector-to-emitter short circuit. Therefore, it is necessary to provide a transient suppressing network at the collector of Q2. The transient-suppression network presently in use is a compromise which affords a minimum peak voltage combined with a magnet release time to provide for adequate teletypewriter margins, The network consists of CL in parallel with R9. CR3 isolates the network from voltages more positive than negative battery potential.

SPEAKER AMPLIFIER SYSTEM
3.28 Figure 14 illustrates a schematic diagram of a speaker amplifier circuit.
3.29 The speaker amplifier is powered only after the ORIG key is operated and is quieted when the station connects, It has two inputs, one from the telephone line via the buffer amplifier in the data set limiter and the other from the multifrequency (MF) tonedialer. Three outputs are provided: (1) into the speaker or optional hand-held receiver; (2) into the telephone line through the sending amplifier in the data set; and (3) an auxiliary output into the data set. The line-to-speaker connection permits monitoring of supervisory signals when originating a call. The TOUCH-TONE dial-to-line and TOUCH-TONE dial-to-speaker connection provides for amplification of the outgoing MF dialing signals and for monitoring them during outpulsing, The line-to-second-output connection is provided for the dial tone detector (when furnished). The various connections mentioned are established by switching in the data set and by the common switch in the TOUCH-TONE dialer.
3.30 The speaker amplifier is a conventional direct-coupled, 2-transistor audio amplifier. The input signals from the telephone line are fed through the receiving buffer amplifier in the data set into the primary winding of the input transformer (Tl), The primary winding continually carries approximately 4mA quiescent current from the receiving buffer amplifier. The other input, from the TOUCH-TONE dialer is fed directly into Ql through C5. Both inputs are DC isolated from the amplifier stages.
3.31 Two outputs are taken from transistor Q2, one from the collector circuit and the other from the emitter.
(a) The collector output is fed through a step-down output transformer (T2) into the speaker (or receiver). A potentiometer is used to set proper volume for varying loop loss and ambient noise level. The TOUCH-TONE dialer signals are independent of loop loss.
(b) The emitter output splits into two signal lines: one for injecting the MF dial tones into the data set sending amplifier, and the other for feeding the dial-tone detection circuit (when provided). The signal level from the emitter output is essentially independent from the setting of the potentiometer.
3.32 Bypassed R6 is a supply voltage dropping resistor. Diode CRI is provided to block a sneak path (in the answer mode) from ground through the ANS and ORIG lamps, Without the CRI, the ORIG lamp would be dimly lit and the amplifier would not be silent when the station is in the answer mode. The amplifier operates only in the originate mode until the station connects. In any mode other than originate, the ground is disconnected. When the station connects, the amplifier input is short-circuited in the dial set.

DIALER MECHANISMS
A. Pulsing Rotary Dialer
3.33 For rotary dialer applications, a pulsing contact of the rotary dialer is inserted into the telephone line. The manual rotary dialer is equipped with a normally closed pulsing contact and a normally opened off-normal contact. The pulsing contact is inserted into the telephone line when the station originates a call. When answering, a short circuit is applied across the pulsing contact. The off-normal contact is placed across the output of the amplifier and silences the speaker whenever the dialing disc is moved.

"Only people who do things get criticized up after the job is done"

CALL CONTROL UNIT—PRIVATE WIRE SERVICE OPERATION
4.01 Power for the motor, selector magnet driver, local power supply, and tape reader power pack, when provided, is supplied from fused 115-volt ac, 60 eps power. Direct current of either 0.020 or 0.060 ampere is required for the signal line(s) and for operation in the local mode. Battery for the signal line(s) is supplied by the customer's facilities, while local battery for operation in the local mode is furnished through the operation of the local power supply circuit in the call control unit. At the rear of the call control unit is a terminal strip which provides the point of entry for the ac power and the signal line(s) into the teletypewriter.
4.02 The purpose of the selector magnet driver is to amplify received DC marking and spacing intelligence pulses. Received DC intelligence pulses are directed to the input of the selector magnet driver circuit in the call control unit where they are amplified and returned as 0.500-ampere DC intelligence pulses to operate the typing unit selector. A detailed description of the operation of a selector magnet driver is given in 3.22 through 3.27. The selector magnet driver described there is similar to the ones used in private wire service.
4.03 A 3-position rotary power switch is the only manual control on the call control unit. Its purpose is threefold: Through the operation of the rotary power switch, the teletypewriter can be (1) placed in the external signal line loop for communication with other teletypewriters, (2) removed from the external signal line loop for local operation, or (3) placed in the off condition,

POWER SWITCH
4.04 Figure 17 is a schematic drawing of the rotary power switch and local power supply circuits, The following chart indicates the condition of the rotary power switch contacts - either open or closed - when the control knob is turned to one of its positions:
4.05 With the rotary power switch in the off mode — the control knob is in the OFF position—the signal line is diverted around the local teletypewriter, and other teletypewriters in the external signal line loop can communicate without interference. All power in the call control unit, except the ac power to the selector magnet driver, is off.
4.06 When the rotary power switch is placed in the local mode—the control knob turned to the LOCAL position—the line relay is not energized. The normally closed contacts A remain closed, and the normally open contacts B remain open. In this condition the circuit is such that (1) local battery is supplied to the selector magnet driver and the send circuit, (2) the external signal line loop is divorced from the selector magnet driver, and (3) the external signal line loop is shunted so that other teletypewriters in that loop cancommunicate without being affected by the operation of the local teletypewriter.
4.07 If the rotary power switch is placed in the line mode—the control knob turned to the LINE position—the line relay is energized, This causes the normally closed contacts A to open and the normally open contacts B to close. Thus, the normally closed contacts A and the noramally open contacts B are conditioned such that (1) the external signal line loop is united with the selector magnet driver, and (2) the local teletypewriter is placed in the external signal line loop, so that it can communicate with other teletypewriters in that loop, With battery external signal loop. Also, the local teletype on the signal line, any transmission from the writer is able to receive, through the typing keyboard or tape reader, when provided, will unit selector, the start-stop signals transmitted cause the typing unit distributor to send start from other teletypewriters in the external signal stop signals to other teletypewriters in the line loop,
Remove speaker, if present, from front of call control unit with both speed nuts by pulling upward.
Renove insulator from rear of call control unit. Disconnect all nylon plugs.
Remove round strap from terminal on call control unit.
Remove four (4) call control mounting screws, Lift call control unit out of sub-base. Some units may have a fifth mounting screw.
NOTE: THE SCHEMATIC WIRING DIAGRAM ILLUSTRATES A SIMPLEX 0.060 AMPERE NEUTRAL DC OPERATION MOTOR

"Some people are magnetic — everything they own is charged"

"If success turns your head, you are facing the wrong direction."

"A job becomes work only when you worry about it."

MODEL 33 CALL CONTROL UNIT
See the following General System Practices for related Call Control information:
A. 574-123-101 -- Principles of Operation
B. 574-123-800 -- Parts

------------------------------------------------------------------------

BULLETIN 310B
VOL 1
TECHNICAL MANUAL
33 TELETYPEWRITER SETS
RECEIVE-ONLY (RO)
KEYBOARD SEND-RECEIVE (KSR)
AUTOMATIC SEND-RECEIVE (ASR)

TELETYPE CORPORATION
5555 TOUHY AVENUE, SKOKIE, ILLINOIS
SEE INDIVIDUAL SECTIONS FOR COPYRIGHT NOTICES. PRINTED IN U.S.A.
310B
VOLUME 1

INTRODUCTION
Bulletin 310B is a technical manual that provides general and specific information about the 33 Receive-Only (RO), Keyboard Send-Receive (KSR), and Automatic Send-Receive (ASR) Teletypewriter Sets and their component units. Change 8 is issued to provide consolidated information, reflect the latest engineering changes, and include a new optional features section.
Volume 1 contains a description of the 33 Teletypewriter Sets and gives installation instructions. Also included in Volume 1 is information on the disassembly and reassembly, lubrication, and principles of operation of the component units of the Teletypewriter Sets. Volume 2 includes adjustment information on all component units of 33 Teletypewriter Sets.
Each volume is made up of a group of appropriate, independent sections. They are separately identified by title and section number, and the pages of each section are numbered consecutively, independent of other sections. The identifying number of a section, a 9-digit number, appears on each page of the section, in the upper left corner of left-hand pages and the upper right corner of right-hand pages.
To locate specific information, refer to the table of contents. Find the name of the involved component in column one and the title of the section in column two. The correct 9-digit section will then be found in column three. The sections are arranged in the order shown in the table of contents. Turn to page one of the section indicated where the contents of that section will be found (except where a section is small and does not require a listing of contents).
The sections comprising this bulletin are now stocked separately and may be individually ordered if the entire bulletin is not required.

310B
VOLUME 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
September 1974
Change 3

FILING INSTRUCTIONS
5. Replace the old table of contents with the new one.
1. The following filing instructions apply to changes sent to the field.
2. Asterisks (*) in the table of contents indicate changes.
3. When the issue of a section changes, replace the old issue with the attached new one.
4. In the case of addendums, turn to the affected section and follow the instructions on the first page of the attached addendum.

1. GENERAL
1.01 This section provides the general description and operation for 33 Teletypewriter Sets. It is reissued to consolidate 33 Teletypewriter Set coverage and to delete coverage of variable features and accessories. Description of the features and accessories can now be found in Section 574-100-104TC. Since this is a general revision, marginal arrows used to indicate changes and additions have been omitted.
1.02 The 33 Teletypewriter Sets described in this section are electromechanical apparatus that provide terminal facilities for exchanging recorded communication via appropriate transmission facilities, including telegraph lines, telephone networks, and radio channels.
1.03 Terminals in the 33 line are available with either 50 or 60 Hz motors and can use either teletypewriter paper (friction feed) or accommodate multiple-copy business forms (sprocket feed). They operate at 10 characters per second (110 baud), feature four-row keyboards, and utilize ASCII (American National Standard Code for Information Interchange). The sets offer a choice of type wheel/keytop combinations and generate alphas, numerics, and many special control codes in even parity. They also provide answer-back on most configurations. Transmission mode may be half or full duplex. Current interface is standard with Electronic Industries Association (EIA) RS-232-C available as a modification kit.
1.04 Some of the equipment available for use with the 33 Terminal (refer to Section 574-100-104TC for a description of optional features) includes various paper and tape handling devices and the magnetic tape terminal which may be added for on-line data transmission and reception up to 2400 words per minute. Model 33 Sets, with the addition of 9100 Series TELETYPE® Station Controllers, can be used in selective calling systems.
1.05 References to left, right, up, down, front, rear, etc, consider the teletypewriter set as viewed by the teletypewriter operator.
1.06 This section covers the following 33 Teletypewriter Sets:
(a) Receive-Only (RO) Teletypewriter Set
(b) Keyboard Send-Receive (KSR) Teletypewriter Set
(c) Automatic Send-Receive (ASR) Teletypewriter Set.
1.07 For schematic and actual wiring diagrams with circuit description, refer to the Wiring Diagram Package (WDP) shipped with the equipment.

2. TELETYPEWRITER SETS
RECEIVE-ONLY (RO) TELETYPEWRITER SET (Figures 1 and 4) 
2.01 The RO set receives and prints messages on a paper copy. It consists of the following components:
Typing unit
Call control unit
Cover
Stand (if so equipped)
2.02 The RO set can only be used to receive and print messages from other connected sets. Sending is limited to the answer-back mechanism.
KEYBOARD SEND-RECEIVE (KSR) TELETYPEWRITER SET (Figures 2 and 4)
2.03 The KSR set receives and prints messages on a paper copy. It can generate messages from its keyboard and answer-back mechanism. The KSR set consists of the following components:
Keyboard
Typing unit
Call control unit
Cover
Stand (if so equipped)
2.04 The KSR set can be used in the following ways:
(a) To generate and send messages from its keyboard
(b) To receive and print messages from other connected sets and its own keyboard.

AUTOMATIC SEND-RECEIVE (ASR) TELETYPEWRITER SET (Figures 3 and 4)
2.05 The ASR set receives and records messages on paper tape and/or page copy. It can generate messages from its keyboard, tape reader, and answer-back mechanism. The ASR set (Figure 5) consists of the following
components:
Keyboard
Typing unit
Call control
Paper tape reader
Paper tape punch
Cover
Stand (if so equipped)
2.06 The ASR set can be used in the following ways:
(a) To send messages from the keyboard while making a printed page copy with or without punching tape
(b) To receive messages from line and print them on page copy with or without punching tape
(c) To prepare tape locally from keyboard for later sending while making a printed page copy
(d) To send messages from tape while making a page copy with or without punching tape.

CUSTOMER OPTIONS
2.07 The following customer options are available:
(a) Automatic/manual (AUTO/MAN) tape punch (customer activated)
(b) Automatic carriage return and line feed (CR/LF) function (customer activated)
(c) Choice of either automatic/manual (AUTO/MAN) or manual tape readers
(d) Wiring options on the keyboard to retain even parity or to have the eighth bit always marking or spacing
(e) Distributor trip mechanism for reader and answer-back magnet options.

3. COMPONENTS
33 Sets.
3.01 In this section, only a brief outline of component operation will be presented. Individual components are described in detail each in a separate section. Refer to the following sections for a general description and principles of operation of the components:
Typing Unit 574-122-100TC
Call Control Unit 574-123-100TC
Keyboard 574-121-100TC
Tape Punch 574-125-100TC
Tape Reader 574-124-100TC

A. Typing Unit
3.02 The typing unit is the receiving component of the set. A signal coming into the typing unit is translated into a mechanical arrangement of codebars. The position of these codebars determines two things: the position of a type wheel upon which characters are embossed, and the selection of functions such as carriage return and line feed. A motor, by means of a main shaft, supplies all the motive force to effect the printing and perform the functions. The friction feed set may be considered the standard type of set. It handles 8-1/2 inch paper, and will accommodate 72 characters per line, 10 characters per inch. Vertically the friction feed set will print three or six lines per inch and will normally print one original and one copy.
3.03 A TP183498 "A" codebar, TP186783 extension clip for friction feed printers, and a TP186808 extension clip for sprocket feed printers provide the end-of-line (EOL) bell on, the 71st character and the automatic carriage return (ACR) line feed on the 72nd character (Figure 6). Refer to appropriate related sections for detailed descriptions, installation and adjustments.
3.04 The TP186781 and TP186782 stop clips were designed to block the function levers of unwanted functions from sensing their printer codebars (Figure 7). The installation of the TP186781 and TP186782 stop clips is as follows:
(1) The TP186781 function lever stop clip is a short clip and is used in the related function box numbered slot. That is, the clip is placed over the slot of the codebar basket tie bar which is in direct line with the numbered function box slot. The TP186782 function lever stop clip is a long clip and is placed over the related letter slots of the codebar basket (Figure 7).
(2) To enable automatic carriage return - line feed in a friction feed type unit, a stop clip is not provided over slot "A". When the function is to be disabled, the stop clip is placed over slot "A" of the codebar basket.
(3) To inactivate the automatic carriage return-line feed functions in a sprocket feed typing unit, a TP186872 stop clip is placed over the related slot "A" and also slot "L" of the codebar basket tie bar. The function lever in slot "A" performs the automatic carriage return function and the function lever in slot "L" performs the automatic line feed function.
(4) To activate the two functions for ACR-LF in sprocket feed unts, the stop clips are removed.
Note: The TP186781 or TPi86782 stop clips cannot be used on typing units incorporating the print-nonprint feature using the TP183565, TP183566, and TP183567 blocking bars in their codebar baskets.
(5) To enable the margin bell and end-of-line bell, a function lever stop clip is not provided in slot "F" of the codebar basket.
(6) To disable the margin bell and end-of-line bell, a function lever stop clip is placed over slot "F" of the codebar basket.
(7) If margin bell is required and no automatic carriage retum-line feed and end-of-line bell is required, the TP186783 "A" codebar extension for friction feed units or TP186803 extension clip for sprocket feed units is removed. When end-of-line bell is a requirement, the margin bell is also a requirement. Both functions are operated from the same function lever.
Note: The stop clips may be used to block other function levers located in the right side of the codebar basket. The stop clips, if removed, should not be reused. A new clip should be installed.
3.05 The TP186873 stop plate is for ASR sets without tape reader trip magnet option, and for KSR and ASR sets without answer-back trip magnet option (Figure 8). Following are the installation procedures for the stop plate:
(1) The stop plate prevents the TP183098 tape reader clutch trip lever or the TP180843 answer-back trip lever from operating when either the reader trip or answer-back magnets and associated armature parts are absent.
(2) The stop plate is present only when there is no magnet with associated parts and may be replaced by one of three different voltage type magnets for reader or answer-back operation. The voltages of the magnets are 24 volts dc, 48 volts ac or dc, or 115 volts ac. 
(3) The TP186878 stop plate is installed in either the reader trip lever magnet position or answer-back position or both (Figure 8).

B. Call Control Unit
3.06 The call control unit serves as a bridge to electrically join the set to the communication networks. In some applications the call control unit serves to initiate, accept, control, and complete the incoming calls. A power supply, local-remote control circuits, and a selector magnet driver circuit are some of its basic elements.

C. Keyboard
3.07 The keyboard is the sending component of the set. Each of its keys control an arrangement of levers which, in turn, position electrical contacts to represent ASCII characters with or without even parity. The keyboard output is a parallel output to the distributor of the typing unit. In half-duplex, the distributor senses the keyboard output and sends it in a serial form to the selector magnet driver. From the selector magnet driver it then goes to the typing unit selector. In full duplex the output is sent by the distributor to the distant station.

D. Tape Punch
3.08 The input to the tape punch is strictly mechanical. The tape punch is a slave of the typing unit; extensions on the typing unit codebars position themselves in the tape punch to set up a similar coded arrangement of punch pins. With drive motion from the typing unit main shaft, the tape punch drives the punch pins to perforate holes in paper tape.
3.09 Some of the tape punches incorporate the customer activated option of automatic operation. The automatic option is activated by removal of the two factory installed disabling clips. The manual controls are not disabled and may still be used for operation or to override the automatic functions if desired. The automatic functions may be disabled by reinstalling the clips. Refer to Section 574-125-100TC for more detailed description and to Section 974-100-201TC for installation instructions.

E. Tape Reader
3.10 Sensing pins in the tape reader are driven upward for every cycle. Where holes are present in the tape, the sensing pins close a set of contacts. Where no holes are present in the tape, the sensing pins are blocked and make no contact. These current, no-current conditions are duplicated at the distributor in parallel form. The distributor then sends the code serially to the selector magnet driver in the call control unit. From the call control unit the pulses go to the typing unit to print the character.
3.11 In some sets, the tape reader power pack is located in the call control unit and enclosed in the right side of the set cover. Optionally, the power pack may be mounted in the stand.
3.12 There is a choice of either manual or an automatic/manual tape reader in the 33 line (Figure 5). Refer to Section 574-124-100TC for the detailed description of the readers.
Note: When preparing tape, all functions (except information separators), such as form-out, carriage return, line feed, etc, must be followed by two fill characters such as delete. These fill characters are required to provide time for the desired function to occur.

4. SET FEATURES
4.01 Functions — Functions refer to nonprinting operations performed by the set which are supplementary to its purpose of printing characters. All sets are equipped for the following functions:
CARRIAGE RETURN — Upon command to carriage return, the movable printing mechanism returns to the left margin.
LINE FEED — Advances the paper or sprocket form one or two lines.
SPACE — Every character printed is spaced a certain distance from the previous one automatically. However, the set can accept a separate command to space in which case it will move the printing mechanism one character space to the right.
SPACE SUPPRESSION — In some instances, such as when commands to carriage return or line feed are given, the set spacing mechanism is suppressed and no spacing occurs. Spacing is suppressed at end-of-line and on all functions except the space function.
PRINT SUPPRESSION — The printing mechanism is suppressed so that no printing occurs when the set receives commands to perform any of the functions.
NULL — The null function serves to suppress printing.

4.02 Even Parity Keyboard — The 33 Sets use seven intelligence pulses to accommodate the code combinations of ASCII. The remaining eighth pulse may be used as an error detection device. In sets so equipped, the even parity keyboard adds an eighth marking pulse whenever the number of marking pulses in an ASCII code combination is odd. If the number of marking pulses in a code combination is even, the eighth pulse is transmitted as a spacing pulse. This means that every code combination transmitted by the even parity keyboard has an even number of marking pulses.
Note: Keyboards not equipped with the even parity feature always transmit the eighth pulse as a marking pulse. The even parity feature may be disabled by the customer to present an always marking or always spacing condition in the 8th level.
4.03 Numeric Keyboard — As the name implies, this optional feature consists of a keyboard with a numeric arrangement. This restricts the set for specialized applications where the exchange of data is mainly of a numeric nature. The keyboard can, if necessary, accommodate a limited number of alpha characters and nonprinting functions such as carriage return, line feed, etc.
4.04 Answer-Back — In sets equipped with this feature, a mechanism coded with a predetermined sequence of maximum twenty characters is used for identification purposes. The mechanism may be actuated locally or remotely.
4.05 Automatic Carriage Return-Line Feed In sets so equipped, as printing approaches the end of the line, the printing mechanism is returned to the left margin and the paper is advanced one line vertically.
4.06 Sprocket-Feed — Sprocket feed sets print characters on a sprocket fed form. The forms are 8-1/2 inches wide and feed out in half-or full-page segments (5-1/2 and 11 inches). Additional options for form lengths are available. A total of 72 characters may be printed in a line on the form with 10 characters per inch. The set will accommodate three or six lines of printed characters per inch. Varying with the weight of the carbon, the set will normally print one original and two copies. When the set has used all the forms available, an alarm will disable the set from accepting incoming calls (with data set only).
4.07 Form-Out (Sprocket Feed Only) — In sets so equipped, the form-out mechanism advances the forms to a predetermined length upon command. The mechanism is adjustable to various fixed form lengths.
4.08 Paper-Out Alarm (Sprocket Feed Only) - A set equipped with this feature and a data set will activate an alarm when the supply of forms is exhausted. The set will also refuse to accept any other incoming calls.
4.09 Low Paper Alarm (Friction Feed Only) — When the amount of paper on the roll reaches a certain amount, a switch activates an alarm (customer provided) which indicates to the operator that the paper supply is low.
4.10 Automatic Punch Controls — This feature allows a number of operating modes for turning the tape punch ON and OFF. The tape punch can be turned ON and OFF manually or automatically.
4.11 End-of-Line Bell — Sets. with this feature alert the operator that the printing mechanism is approaching the end of the line at the right margin.
4.12 Line Break — This feature places the set, so equipped, in an open line condition. A BREAK Key on the keyboard effects the operation.
4.13 Repeat — Sets equipped with this feature can print a character or perform a nonprinting function continuously when the REPEAT key is depressed on the keyboard together with another key.
4.14 Automatic Reader Control — An ASR station equipped with automatic reader control may have its reader activated from a distant station upon receipt of DC1 (formerly X-ON) and off on DC3 (formerly X-OFF).
4.15 Copyholder — The feature consists of a metal frame equipped with a line indicator. The frame mounts on the back of the set, facing the operator. Messages to be transmitted may be placed on the copyholder for convenience during transmission.
4.16 End-of-Transmission (KOT) — When equipped with this feature (data set or station controller required), the sending set can indicate to the receiving set that the entire message has been sent out and transmission is terminated. The keyboard has an EOT key which will activate the mechanism.
4.17 Accessories — A number of accessories are available with the set, including the following:
(a) A sheet metal stand which supports the subbase and components at a convenient operating level. It consists of feet, equipped with leveling screws or roller casters (optional modification kit), and an enclosure to house auxiliary apparatus, such as a data set and the tape reader power pack.
(b) Call control facilities, including buttons, indicator lamps, speaker, ringer, buzzer, and rotary, TOUCH-TONE or card dialers.

5. TYPICAL OPERATION AND APPLICATION
Telephone Telegraph Network System Operation
5.01 The following is a brief description of how 33 Teletypewriter Sets, equipped with call control and answer-back features, may be used in a typical telephone or telegraph network communciation system (Figure 9). When a call is to be made, an operator uses the controls on the teletypewriter set to gain access to the system switching and transmission facilities, which may be dial telephone or telegraph networks. The operator then dials the number of the called station.
5.02 The switching center selects the proper station and signals the receiving station — indicated by visual and/or audible indicators. Using the controls on the teletypewriter set, the operator at the called station completes the connection and conditions the equipment so that communication can proceed in either direction. This is indicated visually and/or audibly at the calling station.
Note: Variations of call control features provide unattended reception of calls.
5.03 Ordinarily, the stations then identify themselves by the answer-back feature. The operator at the calling station can then type the message on the keyboard, or if it is an ASR set, can send it by perforated tape. In either case the teletypewriter set at the calling station translates the message to dc sequential start-stop signals which are applied to the transmission facilities. The teletypewriter sets at both the sending and receiving stations receive the signals and translate them to mechanical motions which print the message on continuous page copy or forms, and/or in the case of the ASR, perforate it in tape. If telephone networks are used, the dc start-stop signals are converted to tone frequencies for transmission and reconverted to dc start-stop signals for reception.
5.04 Finally, the operator at either station can terminate the call and return the set to its idle condition by operating the OFF control. There are a variety of OFF controls, including the EOT key, in conjunction with a data set, on the keyboard, a control knob, or a pushbutton on the call control unit. A set may be equipped with one or two of these controls. In the case of an RO set, only one OFF control is necessary. In the case of a KSR and ASR set, the EOT control on the keyboard, in conjunction with a data set, or the pushbutton on the call control unit may be used.

6. TECHNICAL DATA
CAUTION: THIS EQUIPMENT IS INTENDED TO BE OPERATED IN A ROOM ENVIRONMENT WITHIN THE TEMPERATURE RANGE OF 40°F TO 110°F. SERIOUS DAMAGE TO IT COULD RESULT IF THIS RANGE IS EXCEEDED. IN THIS CONNECTION, PARTICULAR CAUTION SHOULD BE EXERCISED IN USING ACOUSTICAL OR OTHER

1. GENERAL
1.01 This section provides information on optional features for the Model 33 ASR, KSR, and RO Sets. The information includes a description of the option and necessary references to adjustments, lubrication, and disassembly and reassembly. Parts and installation are not included but reference is made to the appropriate component section and installation specification.
1.02 Copies of the sections and specifications referred to in this section may be obtained from Teletype Corporation. Every modification kit comes from the factory with the necessary installation specification.
2. OPTIONAL FEATURES
A. 180801 Universal Function Lever
2.01 The 180801 universal function lever has no marking or spacing tines removed. This allows the customer to optionally remove tines and code the function lever to respond to "nonstandard" code combinations, or replace damaged function levers. Necessary contact assemblies must be ordered separately. See the function box mechanism in Section 574-122-800TC.
2.02 The 180801 universal function lever is to be installed only in the numbered slots of the function casting, such as 4, 5, 6, etc. Do not install the universal function lever in the lettered slots of the function casting, such as B, C, D, E, F, etc.
2.03 The tines on the universal function lever are easily broken off with long-nose pliers.
2.04 The tines of the 180801 function lever are numbered from right to left in (Figure 1) as follows: PS, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 6, 8.
2.05 There are two rows of tines on the universal function lever. The straight row of tines corresponds to the marking pulses of a given code combination; the slanted row of tines corresponds to the spacing pulses of a given code combination.
2.06 Break both the marking and spacing no. 8 tines on units without parity. On units with parity do not break off the marking and spacing no. 8 tines. Break the PS (Print Suppression) tines when printing is desired.
2.07 Instructions for coding the universal function lever are in Section 574-122-700TC. Specification 503870S has both the coding and installation into unit information.

B. 182056 Modification Kit — Provides Model 33 Typing Units With 12 Characters-Per-Inch Spacing
2.08 The 182056 modification kit converts the Model 33 typing unit from the standard 10 characters to 12 characters-per-inch horizontal spacing (Figure 2).
2.09 Typing units modified with the 182056 modification kit offer a choice of 83, 86, or 89 characters per line.
2.10 Parts ordering information is in Section 574-122-800TC. Installation, lubrication, and adjusting procedures are in Specification 504488. Section 574-122-700TC is required for standard adjustments.
2.11 The 183859 modification kit will accumulate forms 8-1/2 inches wide varying in length from 6 to 12 inches. Forms are stored in the bin. They feed from inside the bin, under the shelf, under the plate, and under the platen mechanism. (See Figure 3.) Printed forms are accumulated on the 183857 shelf.
2.12 The vertical loading capacity of the bin is approximately 14 inches. The width of the bin is 10 inches.
2.13 In order to accommodate the various lengths of forms, the 184159 bracket may be positioned at various points on the 183857 shelf (Figure 3). Operator assistance may be required so the forms accumulate properly.
Improperly released forms, or forms that have been kept in the platen mechanism for some time, will not position themselves neatly on the shelf.
2.14 The bin and accumulating shelf are positioned at the rear of the set, as close as possible to the rear panel.
2.15 Specification 504338 has the installation and adjusting information. Parts information is in Section 574-126-800TC. D. 1838877 Through 183883 Modification Kit - To Equip Sprocket Feed Typing Unit With Form Out for Various Lengths of Forms
2.16 Various form lengths can be accommodated on the sprocket feed typing units by changing the cam lobes, the spur gear, and the gear w/gear on the form-out mechanism (Figure 4). In addition to the cam lobes and gears, the 183877 through 1838883 kits include two washers and one screw.
2.17 The modification kits and the form lengths they will handle are shown in the following chart. The chart also shows how many cam lobes are included in each kit with the resulting length of form out when these cam lobes are installed.
2.18 Parts ordering information for the kits is in Section 574-122-800TC.
2.19 Installation, adjusting, and lubrication procedures are in Specification 50410S. For related adjustments, refer to Section 574-122-700TC. E. 1838986 A Through D Modification Kit — To Provide Print-Nonprint on ASR Typing Sets
2.20 The 1838986 print-nonprint modification kit cannot be installed if the set is equipped with the 182290, 182291, and 183128 modification kits. These kits provide Automatic Reader Control, Originate Automatic Transmitter Start (OATS) and Remote Transmitter Call In (RTCI).
2.21 The 1838986 print-nonprint modification kit may be installed on any ASR catalog set. Part of the installation procedures for these sets will include some modification of the call control unit panels to accommodate the toggle switch associated with the kit.
2.22 If the kit is to be installed on sets which have a dial in the call control unit, a specific kit must be ordered. The various print-nonprint kits are:
183986A — Call control units with rotary dial
183986B — Call control units with TOUCH-TONE?® dial
183986C — Call control units with TOUCH-TONE and card dial
1838986D — Call control units with rotary and card dial
2.23 The print-nonprint modification allows the set to send or receive data without producing page copy. With the print-nonprint mechanism turned on, data may be transmitted from the keyboard or the reader without page copy. Data may be received and punched in tape without page copy. In the local mode, punched tape may be prepared without page copy.
2.24 The print-nonprint modification consists basically of a solenoid which operates a nonprint codebar (Figure 5). A toggle switch and an indicator lamp activate the mechanism. When turned on, the solenoid energizes moving the nonprint codebar to the right. In this position, the nonprint codebar blocks all the function levers from rising during the function cycle except the print suppression function lever. The print suppression function lever rises every cycle to suppress printing.
2.25 Operation of the 183986 modification kit affects operation of the optional 185703 interlock mechanism. The 185703 interlock mechanism locks the automatic punch in the "on" mode and prevents it from being turned off electrically. Once turned on, the punch must be turned off manually. Further details on the 185703 punch interlock option are included in this section. (See 2G.)
2.26 The 185703 punch interlock utilizes the position of the print-nonprint codebar to lock the punch in the "on" mode. Thus, the punch interlock operates only when the printer is in the nonprint mode. In the print mode (ie, print-nonprint mechanism not operating) the punch interlock does not operate.
2.27 Installation, adjusting, and lubrication procedures and parts ordering information are in Specification 50460S. F. 184157 Modification Kit — To Equip Friction Feed Typing Unit to Provide Automatic Line Feed When Carriage Return Key is Depressed
2.28 The 184157 modification kit is applicable only to friction feed typing units. The printer will automatically line feed when the carriage return key is depressed. Note that line feeding will vary depending upon the end-of-line sequence used. If the end-of-line sequence is carriage return/line feed, the set will double line feed because of the line feed function associated with the carriage return. If the end-of-line sequence is carriage return, carriage return/line feed, the set will triple line feed.
2.29 Operation of the line feed mechanism relies upon the operation of the carriage return function lever. The blocking lever included in the kit is carried upward to engage the line feed drive link when the carriage return function lever rises upward during the first part of the cycle (Figure 6). During the middle portion of the cycle, both the carriage return function pawl and the line feed drive link are driven downward to effect carriage return and line feed.
2.30 Parts identification for this kit is included in Section 574-122-800TC.
2.31 Two adjustments are necessary with the 184157 modification: Line Feed Drive Arm Clearance — F (PLA-5) and Line Feed Upstop Bracket Position — F (PLA-6). For these and related adjustments, see 574-122-700TC.
2.32 If it becomes necessary to disassemble the kit, reverse the installation procedures given in Specification 504138. The kit should be lubricated per Section 574-122-701TC. G. 185703 Modification Kit — To Add Punch Interlock to an ASR Set Equipped With Automatic Punch and the 183986 Print-Nonprint Modification Kit
2.33 The function of the 185703 kit is to lock the punch in the "fon" mode and prevent it from being automatically turned off. This modification requires that the set is equipped with an automatic punch and the 183986 print-nonprint modification. The punch interlock feature is particularly useful in transmission involving foreign or computer data. When receiving such data, the punch could be prematurely turned off by a code combination resembling the ASCII (American National Standard Code for Information Interchange) DC4 code. (See Figure 7.)
2.34 There are no operator controls associated with this kit. The punch interlock operates in conjunction with the print-nonprint kit.
2.35 Operation of the interlock mechanism is briefly as follows: When the print-nonprint mechanism is turned on, the nonprint codebar is pulled to the right. An extension on the nonprint codebar moves a bellcrank upward, which in turn pivots the latch bail counterclockwise. The counterclockwise motion of the latch bail releases the on-off bail and prevents it from latching up, thus keeping the punch in the "on" mode.
2.36 If the punch is off when the nonprint mechanism is activated, the latch bail unlatches the on-off bail and prevents it from being relatched either by the manual OFF pushbutton or automatically.
2.37 If the punch is on when the nonprint mechanism is activated, the latch bail is already unlatched and is prevented from relatching. The punch may be momentarily turned off by depressing the OFF pushbutton. The punch will turn on again when the Pushbutton is released.
2.38 When the nonprint mechanism is turned off, the punch remains on until turned off either by depression of the OFF pushbutton or automatically.
2.39 Adjustments and spring tension peculiar to the 185703 modification kit are shown in Figures 8 and 9.
2.40 Lubricate all sliding surfaces, pivot points, and spring ends with a drop of KS7470 oil.
LEVER AND LATCH BAIL GAP

H. 185705 Modification Kit — To Provide a Tape Guide for Folded Tape on ASR Sets
2.42 The 185705 modification kit provides a tape guide when using folded tape on the punch of a Model 33 ASR Set. This kit prevents tape from buckling upward or downward when using folded tape. The customer must provide external tape handling facilities.
TAPE DEPRESSOR GAP
To Check
Loosen 151152 screw. Press 185706 bracket down so it rests on top surface of punch block casting. Tighten 151152 screw. Place a piece of tape through punch, as shown. Apply light finger pressure downward to the tape depressor.
Requirement
Min some --- Max 0.015 inch between tab of tape depressor and underside of chad chute.
2.43 Adjustment and lubrication procedures are in Figure 10. Parts ordering information is in Section 574-125-800TC.
2.44 Installation instructions are in Specification 50438S. Reverse the instructions in the specification for removal of the kit. 
To Adjust
Pivot the tab on the side of tape depressor up or down, as required.
Note: After doing this adjustment check the TEN CHARACTERS PER INCH adjustment (see Section 574-125-700TC).

I. 185983 Modification Kit — To Equip Model 33 Friction Feed Typing Units With Carriage Return on Line Feed
2.45 The 185983 modification kit will cause the typing unit to line feed and return the carriage to the left margin whenever the line feed code is received. The line feed code may be generated from the local line feed key or come from a distant station. The kit saves generating the carriage return code after line feed and may be activated at any character position.
2.46 In operation, the modified unit performs the standard line feed function, only, the line feed lever now activates the carriage return and line feed functions simultaneously (see Figure 11).
2.47 Instructions for installing the 185983 kit are included in Specification 50495S. Reverse the instructions in the specification for removal of the kit. Parts information for the kit is also in the specification. Adjustment of the line feed drive arm and line feed upstop is required after installation of the kit. Refer to Section 574-122-700TC. The lubrication interval of the kit is the same as the typing unit. Refer to the appropriate section.
Note: Typing units equipped with the 185983 kit cannot have the automatic carriage return/line feed feature.

J. 186186 Modification Kit — To Operate Model 33 Private Line Sets With DATA-PHONE and Private Line Data Sets
2.48 The 186136 modification kit provides a means for the interconnection of Model 33 Terminals and data sets which conform to the EIA Standard RS-2382-C (Electronic Industries Association). The terminals to be modified must have the answer-back feature and a UCC6 Call Control Unit (or equivalent).
2.49 A terminal modified with the 186136 kit accepts current-no current data and control signals from the teletypewriter and converts them into suitable polar signals for use by the data set. In addition, it accepts polar data and control signals from the data set and converts them into current-no current signals for use by the teletypewriter.
2.50 This kit permits the terminal to operate in either the manual or automatic-answer mode. The kit is intended for use with Bell System 103A, E, and F Data Sets, or equivalent.
2.51 The 198420 modification is similar to the 186136 kit. The basic difference between the kits is that the 198420 kit does not have the possibility of automatic answer.
2.52 The 312418 data set coupler is the basic unit of the modification kit (Figure 12). This basic unit has the power supply, printed circuit board, and a housing. Additionally there is a relay assembly that includes a motor control relay and line local relay, a cable assembly, and some mounting hardware.
2.53 Wiring information for the 186136 kit is in 7454WD, 7455WD, and 8021WD. Parts information and the instructions for installing the kit are in Specification 506308.

K. 186185 Modification Kit — To Convert 3-7/16" Model 33 Sprocket Feed Typing Unit Form-Feed Rate From Six Lines Per Main Shaft Rotation to Three Lines 
2.54 The 186185 modification kit is applicable only to sprocket feed typing units. A typing unit equipped with the 186185 kit has a form-feed rate of three lines per main shaft rotation instead of the standard Model 33 six lines per main shaft rotation. A modified typing unit may be used in a systems network having three lines per main shaft rotation. 
2.55 Operation of the modified form-feed mechanism is the same as described in Section 574-122-100TC except that the 6-stop clutch is replaced with a 3-stop clutch and an appropriate pair of gears is replaced in the (Part of 186136 Kit) sprocket feed mechanism (Figures 13 and 14).
2.56 Parts information and installation instructions are in Specification 50656S. This kit is not included in Section 574-122-800TC; however, the standard form-feed mechanism is shown.
Note: Do not make the Armature Bracket Position or Line Feed Pawl Stripping — S adjustments given in Section 574-122-700TC on units modified with this kit.
2.57 The following adjustments, given in Section 574-122-700TC, are to be made after installation of the kit:
Gear Backlash
Belt Tension
Brush Holder Gap
Shaft Left Bearing Gap
Trip Shaft Position
Clutch Shoe Lever Gap
Brush Holder Position
Left Bearing Position
Selector Cam Endplay
Function Clutch Position
Function Clutch Endplay
Codebar Clutch Endplay
Clutch Shoe Lever Gap — S
Trip Shaft Endplay —S
Line Feed Lever Line-Up and Endplay — S
Form-Out Lever Overtravel —S
Cam Lobe Position — 8S
Driven Gear Line-Up
Codebar Clutch Trip Lever Line-Up
Trip Shaft Latch Lever Endplay
Codebar Clutch Trip Lever Engagement
Function Clutch Trip Lever Engagement
Codebar and Function Clutch Shoe Lever Gaps
Shoe Lever Gap and Trip Lever Engagement
Rocker Shaft Position and Endplay
Bearing Alignment
Main Shaft Rotation
Cam Zero Position —S
Reset Follower Lever Reset Position —S
Trip Lever Engagement — Form-Out — 5
Form-Out Lever-Reset Clearance —S
Trip Lever Engagement — Line Feed — S
Trip Lever Upstop Position —S
Line Feed Selection — S
Note: Make the Line Feed Selection — S adjustment, only, use the following requirements in place of those given in Section 574-122-700TC:
0.145 inch to 0.160 inch for single line feed,
0.010 inch to 0.090 inch for double line feed.
2.58 Lubricate the typing unit main shaft, distributor shaft area, and form-out mechanism as given in Section 574-122-701TC.
2.59 If it becomes necessary to disassemble the kit, reverse the installation procedure given in the Specification 50656S packed with the kit.

L. 186226 Modification Kit — To Provide Model 33 Set With Mobility
2.60 The 186226 modification kit provides a set of casters for a Model 33 Set when it is necessary that the set be easily moved between operating locations (Figure 15).
2.61 This kit may be installed on any standard Model 33 Set using only a screwdriver and wrench; the kit does not require any cabinet workover, and retains about the normal keyboard height.
2.62 There is a brake on the two front casters of the kit for use during unit operation. (See Figure 15.)
2.63 There are no adjustments required after installation of the kit. During installation of the kit, make certain the 186238 foot fits closely against the side of the cabinet (see Section 574-126-800TC). This modification requires no lubrication.
2.64 Specification 50626S has the installation instructions for the kit and if it should become necessary to remove the kit, reverse the installation procedures.

M. 186241 Modification Kit — To Convert Model 33 Private Line ASR Sets to Automatic Reader Control
2.65 The 186241 modification kit converts the Model 33 Private Line ASR Sets to Automatic Reader Control. The automatic control features allow the tape reader to be stopped or started either manually or automatically, locally, or from a distant station.
2.66 There are four control positions on the tape reader with the 186241 kit installed. The positions are explained in 2.67 through 2.70. (See Figure 16.)
AUTOMATIC READER CONTROLS
Figure 16 - 186241 Kit Controls
2.67 In the automatic mode the spring biased handle is normally in the automatic position (AUTO) and automatic operation occurs. The reader responds to ASCII control codes as follows:
DC1 or X-ON — Automatically turns reader on.
DC3 or X-OFF — Automatically turns reader off.
ENQ or WRU — Stops reader and calls in remote answer-back. If DC1 is received at the end of the answer-back transmission, the interrupted reader will automatically restart.
2.68 To activate the reader without receiving the signal code DC1 (MANUAL START), the handle is moved to the MANUAL START position. The reader will then operate, with switch returning to AUTO position when released.
2.69 To manually stop the reader, the handle is moved to the MANUAL STOP position. Handle will return to AUTO when released.
2.70 The FREE position allows the tape to be moved manually, for repositioning. The switch must be returned manually from the FREE position to AUTO.
2.71 When preparing a tape, any control function, except information separators, should be followed by two delete characters (may also be "rubout").
2.72 Description and operation of a tape reader with automatic control is given in Section 574-124-100TC.
2.73 There are no adjustments or lubrications peculiar to the 186241 kit. The tape reader adjustments in Section 574-124-700TC should be made after installation of the kit. The newly installed function levers of the kit should be lubricated in accordance with Section 574-124-701TC.
2.74 This modification consists mainly of the installation of function levers, pawls, and a switch in the typing unit function area; a circuit card in the call control unit; a contact block assembly in the reader; and a new reader cover.
2.75 Instructions for installing the 186241 kit are in Specification 506348; in case it becomes necessary to remove the kit, reverse the installation procedures.

N. 186776 Modification Kit — To Provide a Handle for Model 33 Typing Unit
2.76 The 186776 modification kit provides a handle that attaches to the left-rear corner of the typing unit casting to assist in the installation or removal of the unit only (Figure 17).
2.77 With the carriage to the left, the right side of the carriage rail may be used as a lifting point. Note: Take care not to distort the belt.
2.78 Installation information is in Specification 50714S. Reverse the installation instructions to remove the kit.
2.79 The 187125 modification kit provides a magnetic answer-back trip coil for 'standardized' Model 33 KSR or ASR Sets that did not come from the factory so equipped. The customer must provide a means of energizing the coil. (See Figure 18.)
2.80 The dc coil requires external arc suppression. Since coil drop-out time is not critical, a diode is recommended. In order to provide reliable operation of the mechanism, the operating voltage should not vary more than +10 percent from the nominal specified, and the minimum duration of the operating pulse should be 30 milliseconds. A mechanical latch-interlock system allows the answer-back mechanism to reset at the end of answer-back transmission even though the magnet armature remains attracted, therefore, there is no maximum pulse length requirement. However, the coil must be de-energized before retripping the mechanism.
2.82 Specification 50746S contains part information, installation instructions, adjustments, and lubrication procedure. Reverse installation instructions for removal of the kit.

P. 194822 Directory Holder for Model 33 KSR and ASR Cabinets
2.83 The 194822 directory holder provides convenient storage for directories and like materials on KSR and ASR cabinets.
2.84 The holder attaches to the right side of the cabinet by removing backing from a double-sided adhesive tape and pressing into position. See Figure 19 and refer to Specification 506028.

Q. 198420 Modification Kit — To Connect TELETYPE Terminal Apparatus to 103 Series Data Sets, or Equivalent
2.85 The 198420 modification kit provides facilities for the interconnection of TELETYPE terminal equipment and data sets which conform to the standard of the Electronics Industries Association. In accordance with these standards, all data and control leads of the data set carry bi-polar voltage signals. See Figure 20 for a pictorial view of a typical installation.
2.86 The 198420 kit accepts current-no current data and control signals from the teletypewnter and converts them into suitable bi-polar signals for use by the data set. In addition, it accepts polar data and control signals from the data set and converts them into current-no current signals for use by the teletypewriter.
2.87 The 198420 kit provides for the manual answer mode of operation. The basic unit in the kit is the 312418 data set coupler (see Figure 12). There are also two connectors and some terminals in the 198420 kit. The principle difference between the 198420 kit and the 186136 kit described in 2J. of this section is that the 186136 kit has both manual and automatic answering mode while 198420 kit provides only the manual answer mode.
2.88 It is recommended that signal generators equipped with gold-plated contacts be used in conjunction with this coupler. Although the circuit is designed to accommodate a relatively high voltage drop in the BA circuit, tests have shown that tungsten contacts can exhibit complete nonconductivity under some operating conditions.
2.89 The 198420 kit is for use with Bell System 103 A, B, C, E, and F Data Sets, or their equivalent. All should have the EIA interface. A power cord is provided to connect ac power to the coupler.
2.90 Wiring information for the 198420 kit is in Wiring Diagram 6468WD. Instructions for installing the 198420 kit are in Specification 50248S. The installation of the kit is mainly electrical, a simple cable must be made up, and the cabling terminates in an EIA standard 25-pin connector. Should it be necessary to remove the kit, reverse the instructions in Specification 50248S and 6468WD.

R. 199931. Modification Kit — To Provide Model 33 ASR Sets With an Intermediate Tape Storage Bin
2.91 The 199931 modification kit provides an intermediate tape storage bin holding approximately 100 feet of perforated tape between the tape punch and the tape reader on the left side of a Model 33 ASR Set. See Figure 21.
2.92 There is a chad container in the rear of the tape bin.
2.93 The tape storage bin kit comes assembled from the factory and mounts on the ASR set by an upper and lower guide which slide into position.
2.94 The start of a tape message is clamped in the reader under the tape lid. After feeding out about one foot of tape, make certain that the tape goes into the bin.
2.95 The tape is stuffed into the bin by the feeding action of the tape punch.
2.96 After the message is punched, it may be transmitted by starting the reader which will pull the tape out of the bin with the beginning of the message first.
2.97 The chad container at the upper rear of the tape storage bin should be emptied every time a new roll of tape is placed on the machine or any convenient time afterwards when the tape bin is empty.
2.98 Instructions for installing the 199931 kit are in Specification 504038. Should it become necessary to remove the kit, reverse the installation procedure. Parts information is in Section 574-126-800TC.

S. 38338521 AC Series Motor Assembly for Model 33 Sets
2.99 The 333521 motor assembly is for use in driving Model 33 Terminals where regulated 50/60 hertz alternating current is not available. If the frequency is not regulated when synchronous motors are used, speed variations occur which result in printing errors.
2.100 The 333521 motor assembly does not provide radio frequency suppression filter or shielding.
2.101 The 183991 motor, of the motor assembly, is a 1/12 horse power single phase 115 volt +10 percent ac series type intended to operate at 3600 rpm using a speed regulator. The motor has ball bearings. The input current of the motor assembly is as follows:
60 Hertz 50 Hertz
Starting Input 2.2 ampere 2.5 ampere 
Running Input 1.0 ampere 1.1 ampere (full load)
2.102 This motor assembly uses a governor with a centrifugal switch, and if the speed exceeds 3600 rpm, contacts open until the motor slows (Figure 22). There is a stroboscopic target to assist in adjusting the speed to 3600 rpm.
2.103 The description and principles of operation of a series governed motor are in Section 570-220-100TC.
2.104 Adjustments required for the motor assembly are in Section 570-220-701TC. Lubrication procedures for the motor assembly are in Section 574-220-702TC.
2.105 The installation and wiring information for the 333521 motor assembly is in Specification 50702S. Each assembly comes from the factory with a specification. The specification also contains parts information.

T. 8438691EW Modification Kit — To Provide a Shelf for Attendant Set on Model 33 KSR or ASR Set
2.106 The 348691EW modification kit will mount a telephone or other attendant set such as a Bell System 103G or 113A Data Set or an 804A Data Auxiliary Set, or equivalent, on Model 33 KSR or ASR Sets (Figure 23).
2.107 Instructions for installing and removing the 848691EW kit are in Specification 50768S. Parts mnformation for the kit is in Section 574-126-800TC and Specification 507688.

1. GENERAL
1.01 This section explains how various circuits are electrically coupled to a teletypewriter set, to a telegraph network or, through a data set to a telephone network.
1.02 All circuit descriptions are made with respect to specific wiring diagrams. Alpha numeric references found in parentheses are used to located major components or circuits on the wiring diagrams. An example of a alpha numeric reference is (3C4), and should be read as follows:
(a) The number 3 designates the sheet on which the particular circuit or component is located.
(b) The letter and number combination C4 indicates the horizontal and vertical coordinates where the component or circuit is located.

2. SWITCHED NETWORK SERVICE
2.01 The KSR, ASR, and RO Teletypewriter Sets used in switched network service operate in conjunction with either a 101C or 105A data set and a call control unit. General descriptions and operations of the call control unit or either data set can be found in the appropriate sections.
2.02 The following circuit descriptions should be used with reference to 7882WD for KSR and ASR sets and 7881WD for RO sets.

TEST CIRCUIT
2.03 Operating the TST (test) pushbutton while the set is connected to a test center permits the message sent by the test center to be recorded by the typing unit and, at the same time, turned around and sent back to the test center for analysis.
2.04 The TST pushbutton is a locking type and may be released by momentarily depressing any of the five other pushbuttons in the six pushbutton set. When operated, the normally open contacts 23 and 24 (1D4) close to complete the 10-vole circuit through the TST lamp (located under the pushbutton) to ground.
2.05 The normally closed contacts 22 and 23 open to remove the data sect from ground and disable timed disconnect-on-spacing feature. This is necessary to prevent a disconnect, should a steady spacing signal be included in a test.
2.06 The normally closed contacts 19 and 20 open to remove the keyboard or transmitter signal output at the send break timer from the modulator in the data set. The normally open contacts 19 and 21 close a circuit from the demodulator to the modulator, so that demodulated signals from the test center are modulated and sent back to the test center.

BREAK-RELEASE CIRCUIT
2.07 Set connected to 101C data set: The BRK-RLS (break-release) lamp lights when the RB (reccive-break) relay operates, closing the RB make contacts. This completes the circuit from 14 v ac through the BRK-RLS lamp, the RB make contacts, and the S break contacts to ground.
2.08 The RB and the S (send space) relay operate after the CLR (clear) pushbutton is depressed. The BRK-RLS lamp may flash momentarily at this time. The opening of the S break contacts will prevent the BRK-RLS lamp from remaining on during the clear sequence.
2.09 Set connected to 105A data set: The SO (send space — normally operated) relay operates when the set is turned on. The BRK-RLS lamp lights when the RR (receive break — normally released) relay operates. The RR relay closes its make contacts which complete the circuit through 14 v ac through the BRK-RLS lamp, the RR make contacts, and SO make contacts to ground.
2.10 The RR relay operates and the SO relay releases after the CLR pushbutton is depressed. The BRK-RLS lamp may flash momentarily at this time. The opening of the SO break contacts prevent the BRK-RLS lamp from remaining on during the clear sequence.

RESTRAIN CIRCUIT
2.11 The REST (restrain) lamp lights when the RS (restrain signal) relay in the data set is energized. On a "break," which originates in the data converter, the REST and BRK-RLS lamps are both lighted.
Note: This circuit is found in KSR and ASR sets only.

CLEAR KEY CIRCUIT
2.12 Set connected to 101C data set: Momentarily depressing the nonlocking CLR pushbutton closes contacts 11 and 12. This will complete the circuit to ground in the following ways:
(a) Answer Mode: The circuit is completed through the AN (answer) make contacts.
(b) Originate Mode: The circuit is completed through the AN break contacts and the OR (originate) make contacts.
2.13 The complete circuit path is chrough the contacts mentioned in 2.12 (a) or (b), CLR contacts 11 and 12, the RB (receive break) contacts, and the RB rclay to -20v dc.
2.14 When the RB relay operates, the RB make contacts provide a holding circuit for the relay to ground through the AN make or AN brcak contacts and the OR make contacts, depending on the mode of the set. Other RB make contacts close to complete the circuit from ground through the AN make or AN break contacts, the OR make contacts, CLR contacts 11 and 12, RB make contacts, and the S relay to -20 v dc. The S relay operates and remains energized through the holding path provided by the AN make or AN break contacts and the OR make contacts. The S§ make contacts close and the CLR lamp will light. A timer circuit de-energizes the S relay after 700 milliseconds, the S make contacts open, and the clear lamp will turn off.
2.15 Set connected to 105A data set: The RO (receive break) and SO (send break) relays are normally operated, as designated by the letter O in RO and O in SO. When the CLR pushbutton is momentarily depressed, contacts 11 and 12 complete the circuit from ground through the CLR contacts, the RO make contacts, and the RR relay to -20 v dc. The RR relay operates and remains energized through its holding contacts.
2.16 The RR break contacts open the circuit to the RO relay and release the relay. The RO break contacts close the circuit from ground through the CLR contacts 11 and 12, the RO break contacts, and the SR relay to -20 v dc. The SR relay operates and is held by the SR make contacts. The SR make contacts (in series with the OH make contacts) close and light the CLR lamp. A timer circuit causes the OH (off hook) relay to release and turn off the CLR lamp.

ANSWER CIRCUIT
2.17 When a set is called, an ac ringing current, sent from the central office, energizes the RU (ring up) relay. The sct may then be put into the answer condition either automatically or manually.
A. Automatic Answer
2.18 With the RU relay energized, the ANS (answer) lamp is lighted by the closure of the RU make contacts, which completes the circuit from ground through the lamp to +20 v dc.
2.19 Set connected to 101C data set: With the set in the automatic answer condition, there is a circuit path from -20 v dc through the AN (answer) relay, the RU make contacts, the CY (copy) break contacts, and CP17 to ground. The AN relay is held energized by the ground applied to its make contacts. The ANS lamp remains on because of the ground applied through the series connected AN make contacts and S break contacts.
2.20 The ANS lamp goes off when the S relay operates after the CLR pushbutton is depressed, or on the end of transmission code. The opening of the S break contacts in series with the § make contacts will turn off the ANS lamp. When the S relay operates, the S break contacts place a resistor in the circuit; the S make contacts provide a path to ground through the timer. After the timing interval during the disconnect sequence, the timer causes the AN relay to release by completing the path to ground which short-circuits the relay.
2.21 Set connected to 105A data set: With the set in the automatic answer condition, there is a circuit path from +20 v dc through the OH relay, the OR break contacts, the RU make contacts, the CY break contacts, and through CP17 to ground. The OH relay operates and is held energized by the circuit path through its make contacts, the SO make contacts, and the TM (timer) break contacts to ground.
2.22 The ANS lamp turns off when the SR relay is operated by depressing the CLR pushbutton, or at the end of the transmission code. The SR break contacts in series with the OR break contacts open to turn the lamp off. The OH realy releases when the SO make contacts and the TM break contacts open during the clearing sequence.
B. Manual Answer
2.23 The automatic answer feature is disabled when any one of the following contacts in the circuit through the AN or OH relay and the RU make contacts to ground is opened.
2.24 During the ringing interval, the RU relay operates causing the ANS lamp to flash and the ringer to sound. The RU relay releases during the silent interval. (If the set is out of service, no ringing will take place.)
2.25 The ANS pushbutton is depressed to answer a call. (If the set is feeding forms or tabulating at this time, the set will automatically answer after the operation is completed.) The ANS pushbutton is nonlocking, and its contacts 17 and 18 (1D7) close momentarily.
2.26 Set connected to 101C data set: Closure of the ANS pushbutton completes the circuit from ground through the S and OR break contacts, ANS contacts 17 and 18, and the AN relay to -20 v dc. The AN relay then operates and is held energized by the ground applied by the AN make contacts. Subsequent operation is the same as the automatic answer described in 2.19 and 2.20.
2.27 Set connected to 105A data set: Depressing the ANS pushbutton completes the circuit from ground through the SO make contacts, the ANS contacts 17 and 18, the OR break contacts, and the OH relay to +20 v dc. The OH relay operates and is held energized by the OH and SO make contacts to ground. Subsequent operation is the same as the automatic answer as described in 2.21 and 2.22.

ORIGINATE CIRCUIT
2.28 The RO set goes into the originate mode but has no amplifier.
2.29 Depressing the nonlocking ORIG (originate) pushbutton momentarily closes contacts 5 and 6 (1E7). This will start the following operations, provided the set is not in an answer condition.
2.30 Set connected to 101C data set: Depressing the ORIG pushbutton completes the circuit from ground through the S and AN break contacts, the ORIG contacts, and the OR relay to -20 v dc. The OR relay then operates and is held energized by the OR make contacts and AN break contacts to ground. The closure of the OR make contacts in series with the S break contacts turn on the ORIG lamp and makes the speaker amplifier operable by turning on output transistor Q2 (2E6).
2.31 After the CLR pushbutton is depressed, or upon receipt of the end of transmission code, the S relay operates and its break contacts (in series with the OR make contacts) open to turn off the ORIG lamp and disable the speaker amplifier. The OR relay releases during the disconnect sequence in the same manner as the AN relay releases as described in 2.20.
2.32 Set connected to 105A data set: Depressing the ORIG pushbutton completes the circuit from ground through the SO make contacts, the OH break contacts, the ORIG contacts 5 and 6, and the OR relay to +20 v dc. The OR relay then operates, its make contacts close and the OH relay will operate. The OR relay remains energized when the ORIG pushbutton contacts 5 and 6 open through the holding circuit composed of the OR, OH, and SO make contacts to ground.
2.33 The ORIG lamp lights with the closure of the OR and OH make contacts (in series with the SR break contacts). These contact closures also make the spcaker amplifier operable by turning on output transistor Q2.
2.34 After the CLR pushbutton is depressed, or upon the receipt of the end of transmission code, the SR break contacts (in series with the OR and OH make contacts) open, turning off the ORIG lamp and disabling the speaker amplifier. Relays OR and OH release during the disconnect sequence in the same manner as the OH relay in 2.22.

ROTARY DIAL OR PULSING CARD DIALER CIRCUIT
2.35 The following circuit description applies to ASR and KSR sets only.
2.36 When originating or answering a call, the ringer is disconnected and the hybrid transformer is connected, between ring and tip, to present an off hook condition to the central office. Both the rotary dialer and pulsing card dialer have off-normal contacts which close and short circuit the speaker output during dialing. The operator, therefore, will not hear dialing clicks through the speaker.
A. On-Hook
2.37 When the set is in the on-hook condition, the ringer is connected between ring and cip through the AN break and OR break contacts (in the 101C data set) or, through the OH break contacts (in the 105A data set).
B. Originating a Call
2.38 Set connected to 101C data set: the OR relay operates, the OR break contacts open the ringer circuit, and the OR make contacts close the circuit from tip, through the pulsing contacts of the rotary dial (and the pulsing card dialer, if present), and through the hybrid transformer to the ring circuit.
2.39 Set connected to 105A data set: The OH relay operates and the OH break contacts open the ringer circuit. The OH make contacts close the circuit from tip, through the pulsing contacts of the rotary dial (and pulsing card dialer, if present), and through the hybrid transformer to the ring circuit. After the call connection is made, the CR (connect) make contacts or the CO (connect) break contacts close to short circuit the dialer pulsing contacts.
C. Answering a Call
2.40 Set connected to 101C data set: During an automatic answer, the RU (ring up) break contacts (2C2) open and prevent ringing current from reaching the hybrid transformer when the AN contacts close. The AN relay is operated and the AN break contacts open the ringer circuit. The AN make contacts close the circuit from tip, through the OR break contacts, the AN make contacts, the RU break contacts, and the hybrid transformer, to the ring circuit. Since the set is in an answer condition, the dialer pulsing contacts are not in the circuit.
2.41 Set connected to 105A data set: During an automatic answer, the RU (2B2) break contacts open and prevent ringing current from reaching the hybrid transformer when the OH make contacts close. The OH relay is operated and the OH break contacts open the ringer circuit. The OH make contacts close and the CR make or CO break contacts close, completing the circuit from tip through the OH make contacts, the CR make cr CO break contacts, the RU break contacts, and through the hybrid transformer to the ring circuit. Since the set is in an answer condition, the dialer pulsing contacts are not in the circuit.

"TOUCH-TONE" DIALER CIRCUIT
2.42 The following circuit description applies to ASR and KSR sets only.
2.43 The tone dialer utilizes a transistor oscillator which generates two frequencies each time a pushbutton on the dialer is depressed. The frequencies of oscillation are determined by the values of inductance and capacitance in tank circuits T1-C1 and T2-C2 (3D4-3D6). Different values of L and C are placed into the tank circuits (by the closure of contacts in each circuit) when the pushbuttons are depressed.
2.44 — The tone dialer is made operable only when the set is the originate mode and before the call connection between stations is made. The dialer is made operable by making the base of Q1 (3F5) negative with respect to the emitter, causing the transistor to conduct. The circuit path is from ground through the 200 ohm resistor (connected to the CAL rheostat), RV4, RV3, R1, and into the data set at CN41 to -20 v dc.
2.45 In the 101C data set, this path is provided by the CON make-break and M make-break contacts. In the 105A data set, the path is provided by the CO make-break and MO make-break contacts.
2.46 Once the stations are connected, the dialer is disabled to prevent interference caused by its accidental use. It is disabled by opening the circuit between -20v DC and the collector of Q1. This turns off Q1 and stops the oscillations. The CON break contacts (in the 101C data set) or the CO make contacts (in the 105A data set) open to break the circuit when the stations connect.
2.47 When a tone dialer is used, the speaker amplifier receives two inputs: the normal telephone line input and a tone dialer input. The telephone line signal path is from the incoming amplifier in the data set through CN31 (in the 101C data set) or CN30 (in the 105A data set) through contacts CS (W2-V) to terminal 1 of speaker amplifier input transformer T1 (3F3). The signal from the secondary winding of T1 is fed through contacts CS (Z-Y) and capacitor C1 to the base of input transistor Q1.
2.48 The tone dialer multifrequency output is applied to the base of input transistor Q1 through capacitors C5 and C1. The speaker amplifier output (dial tone) is applied to both the speaker amplifier and the telephone line. through the data set. The circuit path to the telephone line is from the emitter of output transistor Q2, through capacitor C3, contacts CS (T-S), and to the outgoing amplifier in the data set at CN47.
2.49 Depressing a pushbutton on the dialer causes common switch CS to operate and its YZ contacts (3D5) to open. This disconnects the signal input from the telephone line to the speaker amplifier. Common switch contacts ST (3D3) close to connect the amplifier output to the telephone line through the outgoing amplifier in the data set. Contacts W2-V open to prevent the dial tone from reaching the incoming amplifier which would cause a false connect. Contacts W1-U (3C6) open and interrupt the dc current in tank coils T1 and T2. Oscillations then start with a very short build-up time.
2.50 Potentiometer CAL (3E4) is used to adjust the level of multifrequency signals generated by the dialer. It must be adjusted each time the data set is changed.
2.51 Capacitor CAN (3E4) and C4 (3F5) suppress spurious signals in the range of 7 k hz to 14 k hz. These signals are generated during the short time interval when all sensing contacts and the E contacts (3B7) are open.

SPEAKER AMPLIFIER CIRCUIT
2.52 The following circuit description applies to ASR and KSR sets only.
2.53 The speaker amplifier is a conventional, direct-coupled, two-transistor audio amplifier. The amplifier may receive two inputs. One input, the frequency-modulated dial signals from the buffer amplifier in the data set limiter circuit, is fed to the primary winding of input transformer T1. (This winding continuously carries the 4 ma quiescent current of the receiving buffer amplifier in the data set). The second input comes from the tone dialer (if used), and is fed directly into the input transistor Q1 through capacitor C5. Both inputs to the speaker amplifier are dc isolated from the amplifier stages.
2.54 The output transistor, Q2, provides outputs from its collector and emitter. The output from the collector of Q2 is applied to the step-down output transformer T2, and then to the speaker and receiver. Potentiometer CF is used to set the proper volume level which may vary with loop loss and the ambient noise level. Dial tone is independent of loop noise.
2.55 The output from the emitter of Q2 is divided into two signal lines. One injects the dial tone into the data set sending amplifier. The second signal line feeds the dial tone detection circuit in the data set (if provided). Signal levels from the emitter of Q2 are essentially independent of the volume control setting.
2.56 Resistor R6, bypassed by capacitor C6, is a supply voltage dropping resistor. Diode CR1 (2E6, 3E6). blocks the sneak path from ground through the ANS. and ORIG lamps in the answer mode. Without CR1, the ORIG lamp would be dimly lighted and the speaker amplifier would not be silent when the station is in the answer mode.
2.57 When operating with a 101C data set the speaker amplifier is made operable only during the originate mode. This occurs when the OR (originate) relay operates and its make contacts close, completing the circuit from the emitter of Q2, through the S (send space) break contacts (2E8, 3E8), to ground.
2.58 When operating with a 105A data set the speaker amplifier is made operable only in the originate mode. This occurs when the OR relay operates and its make contacts close, completing the circuit from the emitter of Q2, through the SR (send space) break contacts and the OH (off-hook) make contacts, to ground.
2.59 The speaker amplifier is disabled after the stations connect. This is done by short-circuiting the primary of input transformer T1 through ground by closure of the CON (connect) make contacts (in the 101C data set) or the CO (connect) break contacts (in the 105A data set).

SIGNAL GENERATOR CIRCUITS
A. Signal Line Circuit
2.60 The following circuit description mainly refers to ASR sets. It can be used with KSR sets if all references to the reader are disregarded. It can be used with RO sets if all references to the reader and keyboard are disregarded.
2.61 The signal line circuit path is from -20v DC in either the 101C or the 105A data set (4F3). The circuit path goes into the teletypewriter set at CP7, through the distributor, keyboard, reader contacts, and into the data set at CP8.
2.62 Set connected to 101C data set: When the signal generator contacts are closed. current of approximately 0.005 ampere flows from +20 v dc through the 7500 ohm resistor (4F7) to -20 v dc: and a current of approximately 0.008 ampere flows from ground, through the emitter and base of QIM, to -20 v dc. The current through the contacts is the sum of these two currents, or about 0 013 ampere.
2.63 The voltage across diode CR1M (4F7) is fed to the modulator in the data set. When CR1M conducts, the modulator generates the marking frequency; when the diode is off, the modulator generates the spacing frequency.
2.64 The modulated signal is then fed to the limiter and discriminator for demodulation. Demodulated signals consist of current during marking pulses and no current during spacing pulses. During marking pulses, transistor Q3A (4F4) conducts and provides a circuit from ground through its emitter and collector, through the 249 ohm resistor into the teletypewriter sct at CP1. From CP1 the circuit is through the selector magnet drivers, and into the data set at CP2 to -20 v dc.
2.65 Depression of the BREAK key for 140 milliseconds or longer is recognized as a break by the send break timer in the data set. This causes the modulator to originate a timed spacing signal of 225 milliseconds duration.
2.66 The timed spacing signal is recognized as a break (and not a disconnect) by the timer in the data set, which causes the RB (receive break) relay to pull up and close the RB make contacts (4F3). The RB make contacts shunt the transmitter and keyboard signal gencrator contacts which block transmission from the station. The BRK-RLS pushbutton must be depressed before transmission can be resumed.
2.67 Set connected to 105A data set: From CP8 the circuit path is through the SO or RO make contacts to the base of the modulator keying transistor 4Q3 in the data set. When the signal generator contacts are closed, the base is negative with respect to the emitter and 4Q3 is on. This causes the modulator to generate the marking frequency. When the signal generator contacts are open, transistor 4Q3 is off, and the modulator generates the spacing frequency.
2.68 In half-duplex operation, the circuit also goes into the teletypewriter set at CP2, through the selector magnet driver, into the data set at CP1, and through the discriminator output transistor 6Q10. Demodulated signals consist of current during marking pulses and no current during spacing pulses.
2.69 During marking pulses, transistor 6Q10 conducts and provides a circuit from ground through its emitter and collector, through the 240 ohm resistor, into the teletypewriter set at CP1, to and through the selector magnet drivers, into the data set at CP2, and through the signal generator contacts to -20 v dc.
2.70 The time break signal is generated in the 105A data set as follows: When the set is turned on, the CO (connect — normally operated) relay operates and the timer operates the TM (timer) relay. The TM make contacts (4F8) complete the circuit through the BO (break — normally operated) relay and the CO make contacts to ground. The BO relay operates and is held operated by its make holding contacts and break key contacts when the TM and CO relays release.
2.71 Depressing the BREAK key releases the BO relay, causing the timer in the data set to generate a timed spacing pulse (about 200 milliseconds duration). The BO break contact closes to complete the circuit from +20 v dc through the TM break contacts and BO break contacts, to the base of modulator keying transistor 4Q3. This turns 4Q3 off and causes a spacing pulse to be generated.
2.72 The TM relay operates 200 milliseconds later to interrupt the path from +20 v dc, through the TM and BO break contacts, to the base of 4Q3. The transistor turns on again, and the BO relay operates through the circuit from +20 v dc, through the TM make contacts, the BO relay, and the CY make contacts to ground. The BO relay is held operated by its make holding contacts and the break key contacts when the TM and CO relays release.
2.73 When the CY (copy) relay is released, the selector magnet drivers are held in a ready marking condition as follows.
(a) Operation with a 101C data set: The CY break contacts close to keep discriminator output transistor Q3A conducting to ground.
(b) Operation with a 105A data set: The CY break contacts close to provide a path to ground in parallel with transistor 6Q10. Other CY break contacts short-circuit the signal generator contacts to -20 v dc.
B. Signal Generation Circuit
2.74 The following circuit description mainly refers to ASR sets. It can be used with KSR sets if all references to the reader are disregarded. It can be used with RO sets if all references to the reader and keyboard are disregarded.
2.75 Depressing a key, or operating the reader or answer-back, causes contacts to either open or close a part of the circuit path for each code pulse. The remainder of the circuit path passes through the code segment on the outer ring of the distributor, and through the brush to the inner ring.
2.76 The code pulses will be marking if the circuit path is closed, and spacing if the circuit path is open.
2.77 The path for each pulse through the answer-back contact block are make contacts. Operation of these contacts is determined by the coding of the answer back drum.
2.78 The path for each pulse through the reader contact block are make contacts. These contacts will remain open until a hole is sensed in the tape. When this condition occurs, the contacts will momentarily close.
2.79 The paths for pulses 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 through the keyboard contact block are make contacts. The contacts close for each pulse whenever a key is depressed that corresponds to that pulse marking.
2.80 The path for the 5th pulse is determined by transfer and shift transfer contacts. When a key is depressed for a character, the 5th pulse make contacts (4B3) close. This provides a circuit path from KP(5) or KP(2) through shift break and shift make contacts to KP(3).
2.81 When the shift key is depressed in addition to a key for a character which has the 5th pulse marking, the 5th pulse shift break contacts will open. Therefore, no circuit path is provided between KP(5) or KP(2) and KP(3), and the 5th pulse will be spacing.
2.82 When the shift key is depressed in addition to a key for a character which has the 5th pulse spacing, the 5th pulse shift make contacts will close. This will provide a circuit path from KP(5) or KP(2), through shift make and shift break contacts to KP(3), and the 5th pulse will be marking.
2.83 The path for the 7th pulse goes from KP(4) through the KP-V make contacts as follows:
(a) On a nonparity keyboard, the path continues through KP-P, the control break contacts, and KP(3) to KQ-1.
(b) On a parity keyboard, the path continues through KS(2), KS-A, the control break contacts, and KS(1) to KQ-1.
2.34 The path for the 8th pusle, through the keyboard contact block on a nonparity keyboard, are make contacts which close so that the 8th pusle i is + marking for all characters.
2.85 The path for the 8th pulse, through the contact block on parity keyboards, i is from KP(2) to KS(1) as follows:
(a) The 8th pulse is spacing for all characters when the sum of the marking pulses in bits 1 through 7 is even. No path is provided between KP(2) and KS(1) since the 8th pulse make contacts connected to KP-J and the shift make contacts connected to KS-C are open.
(b) The 8th pulse is marking for all characters when the sum of the marking pulses in bits 1 through 7 is odd. A path is provided from KP(2) through the 8th pulse make contacts, KP-J, KP-L, KS-D, the shift break contacts, KS(2), KS-A, and the control break contacts to KS(1).
2.86 When the CTRL (control) key is depressed along with a key for a letter character, the control break contacts open so that the 7th pulse is now spacing. This action makes the 6th and 7th pulses alike resulting in a control or nonprint character.
2.87 On a parity keyboard, whenever the SHIFT key is depressed to invert the 5th pulse, or the CTRL key is depressed to change the 7th pulse from marking to spacing, the 8th pulse must be changed to keep the sum of the marking pulses even. This is accomplished in the following manner:
(a) When the SHIFT key is depressed and the 8th pulse is normally marking, the opening of the shift break contacts connected to KS-D changes the 8th pulse to spacing.
(b) When the SHIFT key is depressed and the 8th pulse is normally spacing, the closing of the shift make contacts connected to KS(2) change the 8th pulse to marking. The circuit path is traced from KP(2) through the break contacts KP-K, KP-R, KS-C, shift make contacts, KS(2), KS-A and the control break contacts to KS(1).
(c) When the CTRL (control) key is depressed and the 8th pulse is normally marking, the opening of the control break contacts change the 8th pulse to spacing.
(d) When the CTRL key is depressed and the 8th pulse is normally spacing. the closing of the control break contacts connected to KS(2) changes the 8th pulse to marking.

C. Control and Shift
2.88 To obtain certain code combinations, the CTRL (control) and shift keys are depressed in addition to some other key. When this is done, the Sth pulse is inverted and the 7th pulse is spacing. but the 8th pulse does not change.
2.89 With the 8th pulse normally marking. the circuit goes from KS(2) through the make contacts, KP-J, KP-L, the shift make contacts, KP(6), KS-B, and the control make contacts to KS(1).
2.90 — With the 8th pulse normally spacing. the circuit will be broken since the shift break contacts connected to KP-R and the 8th pulse make contacts are open. The path through KP-R, KS-C. the shift make contacts, KS(2), and KS-A is broken since the control break contacts are open.

SELECTOR MAGNET DRIVER CIRCUIT
2.91 The selector magnet driver is a two-stage triggering regenerative amplifier or flip-flop, used to drive the selector magnets of the typing unit. The input, 0.020 or 0.060 ampere signal line current, is used to switch the sclector magnets 0.500 ampere output current to full on or off, without intermediate levels. This provides a switching operation similar to that obtained with relays.
2.92 Zener diode ZID1 provides a reference voltage of 4.7 volts. This voltage is maintained regardless of varying valucs of current through ZD1 of with variations in external voltages. Therefore, the junction of CR4 and ZD1 is always -24.7 v dc. (Current flows from -20 v dc through ZD1, CR4 and R8, and through the parallel path of R2 to -40 v dc.)
2.93 The frequency modulated space and mark signals are demodulated and amplified in the data set. Refer to the appropriate sections for a description of the data set discriminator and dc amplifier circuits.
2.94 When spacing pulses are generated, no current flow through the emitter and collector of Q3A (in the 101C data set) or 6Q10 (in the 105A data set). A current of 10 ma flows from -20V DC through resistor R3, varistor CR5 and the emitter-base path of Q1, and through R1 to -24.7 vde at the junction of CR4 and ZD1. (When the signal line current is 0.060 ampere and switching at 0.030 ampere is desired, R1 is 135 ohms.) Transistor Q1 is on (base is more negative than emitter) and current flows through its emitter and collector. This puts the base of Q2 at about -20 v dc. The Q2 emitter, because of bias resistor R6, is at about -20.5 v dc. Because the base of Q2 is positive with respect to the emitter, Q2 is off and no current flows through the selector magnet coils.
2.95 When marking pulses are generated, a 0.020 ampere signal current flows from ground at the emitter of transistor Q3A (in the 101C data set) or 6Q10 (in the 105A data set) through the emitter-collector path, resistor R30N or 6R44 in the data set and through resistor R10. (Resistor R10 is strapped out for operation with 0.060 ampere signal current.
2.96 The current through R10 then divides with 0.010 ampere going through resistor R1, diode CR4 and resistor R8, and through the parallel path of resistor R2 to 40 v dc. The base of Q1 is at a potential of about -19.5 v dc while the emitter is at -20 v dc. With the base more positive than its emitter, Q1 is off and has no collector current. The voltage drop across diode CR4 is about 0.5 volt, making the potential at the base of Q2 about -25.2 v dc. With the base more negative than its emitter, Q2 turns on, and its emitter-collector current flows through the selector magnet coils.
2.97 When Q2 conducts, its base is held at about -25.2 v dc by ZD1 and CR4. The current through R3, R4, and R5 is about 0.5 ampere, most of which flows through the selector magnet coils and the collector. Rheostat R3, is adjusted for a selector magnet current of 0.5 ampere. This current is constant because reference diode ZD1 is not affected by voltage variations.
2.98 Feedback in the emitter circuits of Q1 and Q2 is used to provide the circuit transitions with a "snap action." When Q2 turns on, the current through feedback resistor R3 rises rapidly and the voltage across it increases. This drives the emitter of Q1 more negative. Therefore, when Q1 turns off it is because of the increasing collector current of Q2.
2.99 Similarly, when Q2 turns off, the current through R3 decreases and the voltage across it decreases, making the emitter cf Q1 more positive. In this way Q1 is driven on when Q2 turns off.
2.100 The transient developed in the collector of Q2 when it is turned off is suppressed by the network consisting of CR3, R9, and C1. Diode CR6, added to recently manufactured circuits, prevents destruction of transistor Q1 by accidental shorting of the case (collector) of Q2 to frame ground.

LOCAL AND MOTOR CONTROL CIRCUITS
2.101 The CY (copy) relay (5F3), in the 101C data set, is operated by closure of the CON (connect) relay contacts when the set connects, or by closure of the LCL (local) key contacts 27 and 28. The CY relay releases when the set goes out of the local mode, or when the S (send space) contacts operate on a disconnect.
2.102 The CY relay (5F2), in the 105A data set, is operated by closure of the CR (connect — normally released) contacts when the set connects, or by closure of the LCL (local) key contacts 27 and 28. The CY relay releases when the set goes out of the local mode or when the SR (send space — normally released) contacts operate on a disconnect. 
2.103 In the local mode, the circuit through the CV relay is completed to ground by LCL contacts 25 and 26. Local contacts 29 and 30 close to light the LCL (local) lamp. Using a 101C data set in an originating station, the circuit is completed through the CV relay and OR6 make contacts to ground. If the 101C data set is used in an answering station, the circuit is completed through the AN11 make and OR6 break contacts to ground.
2.104 In a station that uses a 105A data set, the circuit is completed through the CV relay and OH make contacts to ground. This circuit is in effect when a station goes off-hook in either the originate or the answer mode.

READER CONTROL CIRCUITS
2.105 The following circuits are applicable to ASR sets only.
2.106 Using a manual reader, the circuit path goes from 48 v ac through the TD trip magnet, RS break contacts, START switch make contacts, RB or RR break contacts, and TD stop break contacts (on sprocket feed printers) to ground.
Originate Mode
2.107 Using a 101C data set, the circuit goes through CN-32 and OR6 make contacts to ground. If a 105A data set is used, the circuit path goes through CN-32 and OH make contacts to ground.
Answer Mode
2.108 Using a 101C data set, the circuit path goes through CN-32, AN11 make contacts, and OR6 break contacts to ground. If a 105A set is used, the circuit goes through CN-32 and OH make contacts to ground.
Local Mode
2.109 In the local mode, the circuit path goes through LCL contacts 25 and 26 to ground using either a 101C or 105A data set.
2.110 With the switch on the reader in the START position, the start contacts close and the TD trip magnet is put into operation. If the reader runs out of tape or if the tape becomes tight, the start contacts will open. This will cause the trip magnet to release and stop the operation of the distributor and reader. When the tape slackens, the contacts will close and normal operation resumes.
2.111 The RR or RB (receive break) contacts open when a break signal is received from a local or distant station and cause the TD (timer delay) to stop. Depressing the BRK-RLS (break-release) pushbutton will restart the TD
2.112 When the TD is transmitting to a slower speed station through a converter and the. storage device becomes crowded, a restrain signal is sent out causing the RS (restrain) contacts (SF2) to open. This will stop the TD until the storage device empties itself. The TD will then restart automatically.
2.113 Using an automatic reader, the circuit path goes from 48 v ac through the TD trip magnet, RS break contacts, tight-tape break contacts, TDC3 make contacts, and TD stop break contacts (on sprocket feed printers) to ground.
Originate Mode
2.114 Using a 101C data set, the circuit path goes through CN-32 and OR make contacts to ground. If a 105A data set is used, the circuit path goes through CN-32 and OH make contacts to ground.
Answer Mode
2.115 Using a 101C data set, the circuit path goes through CN-32, AN make contacts, and OR break contacts to ground. If a 105A data set is used, the circuit path goes through CN-32 and OH make contacts to ground.
Local Mode
2.116 In the local mode, the circuit path goes through LCL contacts 25 and 26 to ground using either a 101C or a 105A data set.
2.117 Using an automatic reader, the circuit path goes from 48 v ac through the TDC relay, stop break contacts, tape out break contacts, START switch make contacts or TD call in make contacts, WRU break contacts, and RB or RR break contacts to ground.
Local Mode
2.118 Using a 101C data set, the circuit path goes through CP-18, CY make contacts, CP-17, out of service break contacts and low paper break contacts to ground. If a 105A data set is used, the circuit path goes through CP-18 and the CY make contacts to ground.
Originate and Answer Mode
2.119 Using a 101C data set, the circuit path goes through CN-21, CON make contacts, CN-17, to ground and through CP-18, CY make contacts, CP-17, out of service break contacts, 'and low paper break contacts to ground. If a 105A data set is used, the circuit path goes through CP-18 and the CY make contacts to ground.
Originate Mode Only
2.120 The circuit path goes through the stop break contacts tape out break contacts, X-ON make contacts, through CP-10 as follows.
(a) If a 101C data set is used, the circuit path continues through the M break contacts and CON make contacts to ground.
(b) If a 105A data set is used, the circuit path continues through the MO make contacts and CY make contacts to ground.
2.121 If the set is in the originate mode and X-ON is sent from the keyboard or answer-back of either station, the function box mechanisms of both stations will respond. The X-ON contacts at both stations will close momentarily. Since a path to ground is found only in the originate station, only the TD at the originate will turn on.
2.122 The TDC relay is released and the TD stops when any of the following conditions occur:
(a) Switch depressed to STOP position
(b) Tape out
(c) X-OFF code transmitted
(d) WRU code transmitted
(e) Break
(f) Clear or disconnect.
2.123 Using a 105A data set, the TDC holding path in the local mode goes through the CY make contacts directly to ground. The TD is operable in local and out of service modes.
2.124 Using a 101C data set, the TDC holding path in the local mode goes through the CY make contacts, out of service break contacts, and low paper break contacts to ground. Therefore, in the out of service position, no path to ground is supplied and the TD will not start. If the TD is started before going into the out of service position, the TDC1 make contacts will provide a holding path to ground so that the TD can operate after the sct is switched into the out of service mode.
2.125 A momentary closure of the TD call in function box contacts (5E6) will operate the TDC relay. The TDC2 make contacts close to provide the holding circuit. The TD call in function box contacts close whenever the set receives the particular code to which the function box is designed to respond.
2.126 On sprocket feed printers, the PJ make contacts (5B2) close to provide a circuit path to ground through the motor control relay. This prevents the motor from turning off during the feeding of a form.
2.127 The PJ break contacts open to turn off the TD during form feed after the form code is transmitted from the tape. After the form feed is completed, the contacts close and the TD will restart automatically.
2.128 Diode CR6 rectifies the 48 v ac to provide half wave dc for the TDC relay. Resistor RS limits the current through filter capacitor C3.

ANSWER-BACK CIRCUITS
Automatic Answer-Back
2.129 When a station answers a call, the relays in the data set provide a path to ground through the answer-back magnet in the following manner. In the 101C data set, the circuit path goes through the M make and CON make contacts. In the 105A data set, the circuit path goes through the MO break and CY make contacts. The answer-back is mechanically prevented from cycling more than once.
Here Is Answer-Back
2.130 The answer-back will cycle once when the HERE IS key is depressed.
WRU Answer-Back
2.131 When WRU is sent from the keyboard or tape, the WRU function box mechanism operates at both the sending and receiving stations. The answer-back at the sending station is mechanically prevented from responding, while the WRU function box mechanism trips the answer-back at the receiving station.
2.132 On sets with an automatic reader, a sct of contacts is associated with the WRU function box mechanism. These contacts momentarily open when the mechanism senses the WRU code. When the WRU is transmitted from the reader, the WRU break contacts momentarily open the holding circuit through the TDC2 relay. This will release the TDC relay and shut off the TD. The answer-back is then transmitted from a distant station without garbling. If, however, the WRU is sent from the tape of a manual reader, garbling will occur.

EOT DISCONNECT CIRCUIT
2.133 The following circuit description mainly refers to ASR and KSR sets. It can be used with RO sets if all references to the EOT transmit are disregarded.
2.134 In half-duplex operation, the disconnect sequence is initiated whenever the sending or receiving station transmits the EOT (end of transmission) code. The EOT function box contacts at both stations close momentarily after the EOT code is transmitted.
2.135 The circuit is arranged so that closing the EOT contacts (6E4) completes a circuit only when the demodulated output is marking. This action prevents disconnecting on a break signal received during the transmission of a character. The break signal could cause the character to appear as the EOT code and initiate a disconnect. However, the break signal duration is such that the demodulator output will be spacing at the time the EOT contacts close.
2.136 When traffic is transmitted from tape, the EOT code is usually followed by a DELETE character to prevent the transmission of an extra character before disconnecting.
2.137 Circuit operation using a 101C data set: The circuit path is from -20V DC through the S relay, the EOT contacts (when closed), and through the collector and emitter of switching transistor QIN to +20 v dc. When the demodulator output is marking, the base of transistor Q8N is positive with respect to its emitter. (The output of Q3A is ground on marking and -20 v dc on spacing.) Transistor Q8N then conducts and causes the base of Q9N to be negative with respect to the emitter. Transistor Q9N will then also conduct and complete the circuit path from +20 v dc to -20 v dc and through the S relay when the EOT contacts close. The S relay then initiates the disconnect sequence. The SR relay is held operated through its holding contacts.
2.138 Circuit operation using a 105A data set: The circuit path is from -20 v dc through the SR relay, the collector and base of 2Q2, the EOT contacts, and the base and emitter of transistor 2Q6 to ground. Transistor 2Q2 conducts whenever the demodulator output is marking. When the EOT contacts close, if transistor 2Q2 is conducting, the base of transistor 2Q6 will be more negative than the emitter. Transistor 2Q6 will then also conduct and provide a complete circuit path from ground, through its emitter and collector, through the SR relay, to -20 v dc. This operates the SR relay which initiates the disconnect sequence.

RINGER AND OFF-HOOK CIRCUITS
2.139 Set connected to 101C data set: The initial station line circuit path is from the ring side of the telephone line to the parallel-connected bell, the RU relay, through the AN and OR break contacts, and to the tip side of the telephone line.
2.140 At the originating station, the ORIG (originate) pushbutton is depressed, the OR relay operates, and its transfer contacts break the connection of the bell and RU relay between ring and tip. At stations with a tone dialer (M option), a strap is used in place of the rotary dial contacts. When this action is completed, an off-hook condition is presented to the central office.
2.141 At the answering station, the ac ringing current is received from the central office. If the called station is in the automatic answer mode, the ringing current operates both the bell. and the RU relay. The RU relay operates the AN relay, which is held operated by its holding contacts. The AN transfer contacts break the connection of the bell and RU relay and connect the hybrid transformer into the circuit between ring and tip. This action presents an off-hook condition to the central office.
2.142 Set connected to 105A data set: The initial station line circuit path is from the ring side of the telephone line to the parallel-connected bell and RU relay, through the OH break contacts, and to the tip side of the telephone line.
2.143 At the originating station, the ORIG pushbutton is depressed, the OR relay operates and, in turn, operates the OH relay. The OH transfer contacts break the connection of the bell and RU relay, and connects the rotary dial contacts, which are in series with the hybrid transformer, into the circuit between ring and tip. At stations with a tone dialer (M option), a strap is used in place of the rotary dial contacts. When this action is completed, an off-hook condition is presented to the central office.
2.144 At the answering station, the ac ringing current is received from a central office. If the called station is in the automatic answer mode, the ringing current operates both the bell and the RU relay. The RU relay operates the OH relay, which is held operated by its holding contacts. The OH transfer contacts break the connection of the bell and RU relay and connects the hybrid transformer into the circuit between ring and tip. This action presents an off-hook condition to the central office.

OUT OF SERVICE CIRCUIT
2.145 The following circuit description mainly refers to ASR and KSR sets. It can be used with RO sets if all references to the dialer and speaker amplifier are disregarded.
2.146 The OUT OF SERV (out of service) switch is used to prevent the set from automatically answering incoming calls. The OUT OF SERV lamp is lighted by the closure of contacts 7 and 8 to indicate this condition.
2.147. When the switch is turned to the OUT OF SERV position, the set will respond in one of two ways, depending on the option selected. With the A (don't answer) option, the ringer and RU relay are made inoperative by shorting when contacts 5 and 6 close. With the B (make busy) option, the ringer and series capacitor are shorted when contacts 5 and 6 close. This makes the station appear to be off-hook or busy to the central office.
2.148 The NL (nonlocking) contacts 1, 2, 3, and 4 of the OUT OF SERV switch are used at terminal hunting stations, where the switch is rotated to the RESTORE position until a dial tone is heard. In this position the contacts do the following:
(a) Make contacts 3 and 4 short the tip to ring, producing an off-hook condition, which detected by central office. The central office releases the set from lock-out and applies the dial tone.
(b) Make contacts 1 and 2 apply ground to the speaker amplifier, permitting it to pass the dial tone.

PAPER ALARM CIRCUIT
2.149 The paper alarm circuit operates an audible alarm (buzzer) and warning lamp to alert the operator when the tape or paper supply is low. In addition, it prevents the set from automatically answering a call during an alarm condition.
2.150 When the typing unit paper supply is low, the low paper switch will operate. On friction feed typing units, this switch will operate when the paper roll decreases to a predetermined diameter. On sprocket feed typing units, the switch will operate when a bail drops through a notch in a form near the end of the supply.
2.151 Operation of any of these switches will close the circuit from 10 v ac to ground by going through the buzzer and the BUZ-RLS (buzzer release) lamp. The buzzer sounds. Depressing the BUZ-RLS pushbutton will turn the buzzer off but the BUZ-RLS lamp will remain on until one of the other pushbuttons is depressed.
2.152 Set connected to 101C data set: The automatic answer circuit path is from -20 v dc through the AN relay, RU make contacts, CY break contacts, out of service switch break contacts and low paper switch break contacts to ground.
2.153. On automatic answer, the RU (ring up) make contacts (8B5) close to operate the AN (answer) relay, which remains operated because of its holding contacts.
2.154 Set connected to 105A data set: The automatic answer circuit path is from +20 v dc through the OH relay, OR break contacts, RU make contacts, CY break contacts, out of service switch break contacts and low paper switch break contacts to ground.
2.155 On automatic answer, the RU (ring up) make contacts (8B6) close to operate the OH (off-hook) relay which remains operated because of its holding contacts.
2.156 The automatic answer is disabled during the following conditions regardless of which data set is used:
(a) Set in Local Mode: In the local mode, the CY relay is operated and its break contacts are open, preventing automatic answer. On an incoming call, the ringer sounds and the ANS lamp flashes. The call may be answered manually by depressing the ANS pushbutton.
(b) Low Paper: The low paper break contacts open, preventing automatic answer from taking place. On an incoming call the ringer will sound and the ANS lamp will flash. The call may be answered manually depressing the ANS pushbutton.
(c) Out of Service: The out of service break contacts open preventing automatic answer from taking place and also disabling the ringer. The ANS lamp will flash on incoming calls. The call may be answered manually by depressing the ANS pushbutton.

POWER CIRCUITS
2.157 The following circuit description refers mainly to ASR sets. It can be used with KSR sets if all references to the tape reader and tape punch are disregarded. It can be used with RO sets if all references to the tape reader, tape punch, and the rectifier are disregarded.
2.158 The 115 v ac input supplies the power for the following items:
(a) Motor
(b) Selector magnet driver transformer
(c) Power transformer (10-14-48 v ac)
(d) Elapsed time indicator
(e) Rectifier on reader card.
2.159 The elapsed time indicator and motor are operated by the motor control relay make contacts.
2.160 When the TD trip magnet operates it causes the TD feed magnet to energize. The feed magnet raises the reader sensing pins while the distributor transmits the start pulse. If a hole is present in the tape, the code contacts will be closed. If no hole is present in the tape, the code contacts will be open.
2.161 The TD trip magnet remains energized and the sensing pins remain up when the distributor transmits the 8th code pulse. At the end of the 8th code pulse, the TD feed magnet contacts open causing the magnet to de-energize. This will cause the feed wheel to stop and the sensing pins to retreat.
2.162 When the distributor transmits the start pulse, the TD feed contacts will close and the cycle will be repeated.

3. CIRCUIT SWITCHING SERVICE
3.01 Circuit switching service operates over short and intermediate length telegraph loops using neutral signaling or, over longer loops with polar signaling when modified with proper polar-to-neutral converting circuitry. Within the unit are a power supply circuit, and a motor delay timer circuit.
POWER SUPPLY CIRCUIT
3.02 A fused power supply circuit (Figure 1), operates on 117 volts ac +10 percent at 60 hertz +1/2 hertz, and a power input of 12 watts. The power supply ground is floating with respect to the input signal line; that is, it is not at earth ground. Therefore, the center tap of the transformer is +120 volts from earth ground in neutral signaling. The polar adapter, on teletypewriters so equipped, also contains a power supply. This power supply, as well as the one found on the call control unit, uses an earth ground.
LOCAL-REMOTE CONTROL CIRCUITS
3.03 The local-remote control consists of three printed circuits placed upon the same circuit card that accomplish the switching called for by the line input or the call control unit pushbuttons. The three circuits are, proceed-to-dial, connect, and local. The circuits are essentially made up of binaries (flip-flops) that have been modified to perform certain functions. All three circuits are protected with a diode arc suppressor against transients and voltage pulses generated by their associated relays.
3.04 A negative voltage, generated at the collector of a transistor will be shorted through the diode to resistor R27. The transient will be developed across R27 and the lamp associated with the relay. The diodes that suppress the transients in each circuit are C10, C12, and C19. The circuits are also protected from transient noise induced into them from leads in the cable to the dial and key and lamp assembly. A low-pass filter or delay network of the RC type is placed in a feedback loop in each binary. These delay networks are made up of R10 and C3. R21 and C4, and R39 and C11.
3.05 The signal line inputs are filtered against spurious noise occurring on the signal line. There are two of these RC type filters. In che proceed-to-dial circuit, R5 and C1 provide a 0.001 second delay while, R12 and C2 provide a 0.02 second delay in the connect circuit. The network consisting of R31 and C6 found in the 240 volt signal line, acts as an arc suppressor to protect its associated contacts. This network may be removed from the signal line by removing the strap between terminals TL4 and TL5. Additional network components may be added to these terminals, if required.
A. Proceed-to-Dial Circuit
3.06 The proceed-to-dial circuit (Figure 2), consists of a binary with a line input amplifier. The amplifier consists of transistor Q1 and its associated components, and the binary consists of transistors Q2 and Q3 along with their associated components. The amplifier is connected to the binary through a low-pass filter delay network (R5 and C1) which suppresses signal line noise. The input to the binary, coming from the filter network and passing through R6, will turn on the proceed-to-dial circuit. Control inputs through R15 and the stop pushbutton contacts 1 and 2, are used to turn off the circuit. Operation of the transistors in the proceed-to-dial circuit is as follows:
(a) When transistor Q2 is in conduction, its collector is very near a neutral potential. Current will flow through Q2, R11, stop pushbutton contacts 1 and 2, and R27. Current will also flow from +18 volts through R8 and CR9 to the collector of Q2. The base of Q3 will be held at +0.8 volts with respect to the collector of Q2 due to the current flow of CR9. The base of Q3 will therefore, be slightly positive with respect to neutral, and Q3 will be turned off. With Q3 off, its collector will be negative and Q2 will be held in conduction. This is accomplished by applying current to the base of Q2 supplicd through the low-pass filter made up of R9, R10, and C3.
(b) When transistor Q3 is in conduction, the proceed-to-dial circuit will be on and the collector of Q3 will be very near neutral. Current will flow through Q3, K1, the dial lamp, and R27. Since the collector of Q3 is near neutral, current flow through R7, R9, and R10 will produce a positive potential at the base of Q2. This positive potential will hold Q2 off. With Q2 held off, base current for Q3 will flow through CR9, R11, stop pushbutton contacts 1 and 2, and R27. This flow of current will hold Q3 in conduction.
(c) If an input current in excess of 0.009 ampere flows from TB-8 across CR4 to neutral, a positive potential of 0.8 volts will be developed across CR4. This positive potential will hold Q1 in conduction and its collector near neutral. The neutral condition has no effect upon the base of Q2 because of the isolation provided by R5 and R6. If the input current falls below 0.009 ampere, a negative potential of 0.8 volts is developed across CR4 due to current flow through R3, R2, and CR4. This potential will turn off Q1 and its collector becomes positive. Current now flows through R4 and R5 to charge C1 towards a +18 volts. When a sufficient voltage is developed across C1, the base of Q2 will be back-biased through R6. Transistor Q2 turns off and Q3 turns on placing the proceed-to-dial circuit in the on condition. Back-bias to the base of Q2 is supplied by the voltage divider R7, R9, and R10 so that the positive potential across R6 is no longer required to hold Q2 off. If more than 0.009 ampere begins to flow across CR4 again, Q1 will turn on, and its collector will go to neutral, but this will have no effect on the base of Q2.
(d) If a negative signal is applied to the side of R15 opposite the base of Q2, enough current will flow to forward-bias the base of Q2 and cause it to conduct. Q3 will turn off and supply sufficient base current through R9 and R10 to hold Q2 in conduction. The negative signal on R15 can now be removed, and Q2 will remain in conduction. 
(e) With the proceed-to-dial circuit on, Q3 will be in conduction. Base current for Q3 will flow through R11 and CR9. Depressing the STOP pushbutton causes contacts 1 and 2 to open breaking the current path. Transistor Q3 will then turn off and Q2 will turn on. There will be no collector current flowing in Q2; therefore, the collector will be near neutral holding Q3 off. When the STOP pushbutton is released, collector will flow in Q2 and the proceed-to-dial circuit will turn off.
B. Connect Circuit
The connect circuit (Figure 3) consists of a binary (Q4 and Q6) of which one side is driven by emitter follower Q5. The only control input to this circuit is by the signal line through R12 and R13. A signal delay of approximately 0.02 seconds is provided by the low-pass filter network consisting of C2 and R12. A single passive control, consisting of R28 and CR3, is used for low-paper conditions.
(a) Transistor Q5 controls the base of Q4. When transistor Q4 is in conduction, its collector is very near a neutral potential. A voltage divider consisting of R17 and R18 hold the base of Q6 positive so that Q6 is off. This will make the collector of Q6 go negative and also make the base of Q5 go negative by the current path through R20 and R21. Since Q5 is an emitter follower, its emitter will be held at the same potential as its base. With its emitter at a negative potential, Q4) will be held on.
(b) When the connect circuit is on, Q6 will be in conduction and its collector will be near a neutral potential. The voltage divider R19, R20, and R21 holds the base of Q5 and therefore the emitter, at a positive potential. With the emitter of Q5 at a positive potential, the base of Q4 will be reverse-biased. the transistor will be off, and its collector will go negative. The connect circuit will be held on by the base for 7 Q6 that flows through: R16 and R17.
(c) To control the connect circuit a high voltage must be developed at the junction of CR1 and CR2 (circuit card TP305689). This voltage will be approximately +200 volts. If a +200 volt signal is applied at this point, the base of QS will be biased positive. Q4 will turn off and Q6 will turn on. If a -200 volt signal is applied, the base of Q5 will be biased negative, Q4 will turn on and Q6 will turn off. An input signal at or near a neutral potential will have no effect upon the connect circuit, and it will remain in its prior state.
(d) The base of Q5 is protected against excessively high voltages by transistor operation or by CR11. If a -200 vole signal is present, the voltage on the base of Q5 will go in a negative direction and force its emitter to follow. When the emitter of Q5 becomes negative with respect to ground, Q4 will turn on. With Q4 in conduction, the potential on its base will be close to the emitter. Therefore, the base cannot go more negative than -0.4 volts. This action will hold the base voltage of Q4 to within -0.4 volts of its emitter. Therefore, the base voltage of Q5 cannot become more negative than 0.8 volts. If a +200 volt signal is present at the input, the base of Q5 will start to become positive. The diode CR11 is forward-biased to positive base voltages. It will, therefore, limit the base voltage of Q5 to +0.8 volts. Therefore, under the severest input conditions, a voltage swing of more than +0.8 volts is not expected.
(e) Resistors R24, R25, R26 and capacitor C5 are used where a polar converter is employed. They are shown all connected together and have no effect upon the operation of this circuit.
C. Local Circuit
3.08 The local circuit (Figure 4), consists of a binary and a unijunction transistor timer. The binary operation of Q8 and Q9 is the same as that described in the proceed-to-dial circuit. Four input controls are available for use with the local circuit.
(a) Operation of the LOCAL pushbutton allows transistor Q9 to go into conduction and also turn the local circuit on. When contacts 1 and 2 are closed, base current will be supplied to Q9 through R37 and R38 causing Q9 to turn on and Q8 to turn off. If the anode 'of either CR13 and CR14 is neutral, the current flowing through R38 will flow through one of these diodes and not reach the base of Q9. These two diodes allow the local circuit to be turned on only when the proceed-to-dial and the connect circuits are off.
(b) The local circuit can be turned off by depressing either the START or the STOP pushbutton. When the local circuit is on, the base current of Q9 flows through start contacts 4 and 5 and stop contacts 1 and 2. Since the contacts of the two pushbuttons are in series, operating either of them will turn Q9 off. The output of unijunction transistor Q7, will also turn off the local circuit as it is basically a breakdown device.
(c) If the voltage on C9 is more negative than approximately -8 volts, the resistance of the junction between the lead connected to C9 and the lead connected to R35 is high. When the voltage on C9 becomes more positive than -8 volts, the resistance of this junction will become very low, and C9 will recharge through R35. The increase in current flowing through R35, while recharging C9, will cause an increase in the voltage drop R35. The positive pulse is coupled through C10 and CR17 to the base of Q9 and causes it to turn off and Q8 to turn on. The local circuit is then off. As capacitor C9 is recharged, the resistance of the junction again becomes high.
(d) Capacitor C9 is discharged toward neutral or held at about -18 volts through R32 and R33. If the input to R32 is negative (connect circuit off), C9 will be held at -18 volts. If the input to R32 is near neutral (conncct circuit on), capacitor C9 will discharge through R32 and R33 toward neutral. At the end of a 2.3 second interval, the voltage on C9 will be approximately -8 volts and the unijunction will break down and turn the local circuit off as described above.
MOTOR DELAY TIMER CIRCUIT
3.09 The motor delay timer circuit (Figure 5), provides the means to delay motor turn-off in the teletypewriter. This allows the teletypewriter to complete its printing cycle and come to rest before the motor begins to stop. This circuit, along with the selector magnet driver circuit, are mounted on the same circuit card but are electronically independent of each other. The circuit is designed to drive a motor control relay connected between points 3 and 5 and is operated when either the connect or local circuit is on.
3.10 The motor delay timer consists of a regenerative switch (Q3 and Q4) and an output driver (Q2). The input to the motor delay timer is from the collector of Q9 through diode CR16 or from the collector of Q6 through diode CR15 in the local and connect circuits of the local-remote control circuit. The diodes provide insulation between the input of the motor delay timer and the transistors of the local-remote control for negative signals. When the input of the motor delay timer at point 2 is grounded, the output driver will turn on immediately. When the input signal is removed, the output driver will remain in condunction for 0.55 seconds while holding the motor relay operated long enough to allow the teletypewriter to complete its printer cycle before turning off the motor.
3.11 When a negative input signal is applied to point 2, base current to Q3 will flow through R13, R15, and R14. Q4 will be held in conduction by the base current flowing through R12 and R16. The collector of Q3 will be close to -1.6 volts. The voltage divider R12 and R16, will hold the base of Q2 positive and therefore Q2 will be cut off.
3.12 If ground is now applied to the input, the base of Q3 will approach ground and become reverse-biased. This will turn Q3 off. The collector of Q3 will now be at a potential of -10 volts. This voltage will cause the voltage at the base and emitter of Q4 to be at a potential of -8.5 volts. The emitter of Q3 will be held at -8.5 volts by the emitter of Q4. This will hold Q3 off. The -10 volt potential at the collector of Q3 will cause base current to flow to Q2 through CR7, CR8, and R12. Q2 will then go into conduction, and operate the external motor control relay.
3.13 If the ground input is now removed, current will flow through R13 and R15 and charge C2 toward -18 voles. After about 0.55 seconds the voltage on C2 will reach -8.5 volts and Q3 will go into conduction with its collector going less negative. This causes the base of Q4 and, therefore, the emitter of Q3 and Q4. to become less negative. This process will continue until both Q3 and Q4 are saturated. C3 will then discharge through R9 and the base of Q3 to ground. Base current to hold Q3 in conduction is supplied through R13, R15, and R14. 
3.14 At 25 degrees C, with a 390 load, the delay of the motor timer is from 0.475 second to 0.675 second when the supply voltages are within 3 percent of their nominal values.
SELECTOR MAGNET DRIVER CIRCUIT
3.15 The selector magnet driver circuit (Figure 6), combined with an external power transformer, and a filter capacitor, provides 0.500 ampere current for driving the selector magnet from a telegraph signal source of appropriate input line current. The input signals are applied through terminals 6 and 11, with R1 determining the switching level.
3.16 For a mark input, a positive current is applied to terminal 11. This will provide a positive bias to the base of transistor Q1 that overcomes the normal negative bias supplied through R1 and stabilized by zener diode ZD1. Q1 will turn off as the increasing positive current reaches one-half of its final value. The collector of Q1 then goes negative and this negative potential is applicd to the base of QA and turns QA on. R4 will provide emitter bias to Q1, and supplies a regenerative action to the transistor.
3.17 The selector magnet is connected between the collector of QA and the junction of R7 and R8, and supplies the load for QA. On marks, the current rises to 0.500 ampere and energizes the selector magnet. On spaces, the positive input bias decreases, and Q1 is turned on at the half-line current point by negative bias through R1. The collector of Q1 rises towards a zero potential. applying reverse-bias to QA, turning off QA, and de-energizing the selector magnet. The selector magnet opposes the change in current, and it applies a transient potential to the collector of QA. CR3 will now conduct and pass the transient potential to C1 and R5 which limits the potential to a valuc well under the breakdown voltage QA while selector magnet energy is being dissipated.
NEUTRAL SIGNALING
A. Circuit Interconnections
3.18 The block diagram for the circuit interconnections is shown in Figure 7.
Proceed-to-Dial
3.20 In order to turn on the proceed-to-dial circuit, two conditions must be satisfied: The START pushbutton must be depressed and the proper line signal must be received from the exchange. The START pushbutton presents the proper signal to the exchange so that the request to dial is recognized. It also protects the circuit from an open line and long line breaks such as those generated when dialing.
3.19 The proceed-+o-dial cizcuit can be turned off in two ways: By the depression of the STOP push-button or by the operation of the connect circuit. Local control is provided by the STOP pushbutton while the connect circuit provides automatic control initiated by the exchange.
3.21 The connect circuit is controlled only by the line and, therefore, has only one input which comes from line sensing and control.
Local Circuit 
3.22 To turn on the local circuit, the following conditions must be satisfied:
(a) The proceed-to-dial and the connect circuits must be off, and the LOCAL pushbutton must be depressed.
(b) The input of both the procced-to-dial and the connect circuit protect against the accidental operation of the local circuit which would otherwise cause an automatic disconnect.
3.23 The local circuit is turned off by depressing the STOP pushbutton, the START pushbutton, or the 2.3-second timer. The START and STOP pushbuttons provide local control of the circuit, while the 2.3-second timer provides the automatic control. The timer is controlled by the connect circuit which is, in turn, controlled by the line. The timer will continue to oscillate as long as the connect circuit is on although only the first timing pulse is required to turn off the local circuit.
3.24 Each of the circuits mentioned has an input to the line sensing and control. The inputs are in the form of relay contacts which switch the line through the proper internal path in the local and remote control assembly. When either the connect or local circuit is on, a motor control relay is operated. The contacts of the relay are used to turn on the motor of the associated ty ping unit.
B. Idle Line Conditions
3.25 The schematic diagram of the local-remote control circuit (Figure 8) shows the current flow during the idle line condition. In this state, all relays and lamps are off. This requires that transistors Q3, Q6, and Q9 be off and that Q2, Q4, and Q8 be in conduction. The output transistor of the motor delay timer is off, and the selector magnet driver is marking.
3.26 The signal loop is a 240-volt source with 4000 ohms in series. In the idle condition the local-remote control offers 43,800 ohms of local resistance to the signal loop. The flow of loop current in this condition is shown in Figure 8. Current flows from TB8, the positive idle terminal, across CR4, through R1 and CR1 in parallel with the base emitter junction of Q4 and Q5, R13 and R12. From this point, current flows through the dial pulse contacts to terminal TB9.
3.27 The loop current develops a positive potential at A in Figure 8 holding Q1 on. The collector of Q1 is shorted to ground through START pushbutton contacts 1 and 2. Therefore, no signal may be developed at the collector unless the START pushbutton is depressed. The loop current develops approximately a -200 volt potential at point B. This potential will hold Q4 in conduction while holding Qé6 and the connect circuit off.
3.28 To locally hold the selector magnet driver and the distributor at neutral, a 0.060 ampere current is supplied through R23 and flows through K2 relay contacts 1 and 2, and K3 relay contacts 1 and 2.
C. Initiating a Call
3.29 A call can be initiated with the teletypewriter in either the idle or local condition by depressing the START pushbutton. This performs three functions: Contacts 4 and 5 open to turn off the local circuit; contacts 1, 2, and 3 operate shorting the local loop resistance, allowing the loop current to rise to 0.060 ampere; contacts 1 and 2 open to remove the short from the collector of Q1. The collector will remain at ground since more than 0.002 ampere is flowing through C4. The loop current now flows from TB8, through CR4, START pushbutton contacts, CR1, and the dial impulse contacts to TB9. Shorting out the local loop resistance causes the voltage at point A to rise to neutral. This action has no effect on the state of the connect circuit.
(a) Proceed-to-dial: When the START pushbutton is depressed, a proceed-to-dial pulse will cause the collector of Q1 to go positive and, in turn, operate the proceed-to-dial circuit (turn Q3 on). With Q3 in conduction, current will flow through relay K1 and the DIAL lamp. This causes both of them to be operated. The normally open contacts 1 and 2 of the K1 relay will operate and short the START pushbutton contacts 1 and 3. Loop current now flows from TB8, through CR4, K1 relay contacts 1 and 2, CR1, and the dial pulse contacts to terminal TB9.
(1) With Q3 in conduction, its collector will be near neutral, CR13 will be forward-biased, and depending on the strapping of TL1, 2, and 3, will either hold the junction of R37 and R38 in the local circuit near neutral and, therefore, preventing the operation of the local circuit or will cause the motor to start.
(2) The proceed-to-dial circuit may be turned off by depressing the STOP pushbutton. STOP contacts 1 and 2 will open causing Q3 to curn off and the unit to revert to the idle line condition. The current loop is shown in Figure 8.
(3) If the START pushbutton is releascd any time before the proceed-to-dial pulse is given by the exchange, the unit will revert back to the idle line condition. The START pushbutton should not be reoperated for a few seconds as the exchange requires a short time to reset after this condition.
(b) Dialing: The dial is in the signal loop at all times, but it may be used to transmit information to the exchange only during the proceed-to-dial and the connect conditons. Since the dial impulse contacts are in series with the loop, operation of the dial will completely break loop current. In order to prevent damage to the dial contacts, an arc suppressor consisting of R31 and C6, is placed across the contacts. Terminal lugs TL4 and 5 are provided so that this network can easily be connected or disconnected or so that additional network components can be placed in series with R31 and C6 as needed.
D. Connection
3.30 The schematic diagram of the local remote control circuit '(Figure 9) shows the current flow during the local connection.
3.31 Local Connection: If a call is initiated locally, current in the loop will be 0.060 ampere from TB8 to TB9 through the path described in 3.28 before connection. When the loop polarity is reversed by the exchange, current will flow from TB9 to TB8. Diode CR1 becomes reverse-biased and stops current flow except through R12 and R13. This current flow will turn off Q4 and turn on Q6. With Q6 in conduction, the connect circuit will be on, the K2 relay will operate and the CONN (connect) lamp will light. The contacts of the K2 relay will switch and allow the loop current of 0.060 ampere to flow through the distributor and selector magnet driver as shown in Figure 9. Loop current now flows from TB9, through the dial pulse contacts, CR2, K2 relay contacts 2 and 3, K3 relay contacts 1 and 2, the keyboard distributor, the selector magnet driver, and CR4 to TBS.
3.32 With Q6 in conduction, CR15 will be forward-biased and turn on the output transistor of the motor delay timer. The K4 motor control relay will operate by closing its contacts and turning on the printer motor. Q4 will now be cut off and its collector will go negative. Feedback from the collector of Q4 to the base of Q2 through R15 will turn off the proceed-to-dial circuit. The K1 relay contacts will open and the dial lamp will go out, This will have no effect upon loop current flow since these contacts are not now in the current loop. The junction of R37 and R38 is held near neutral from the collector of Q6 through CR14. This will prevent operation of the local circuit.
3.33 Remote Connection: On an incoming call, the teletypewriter may be connected remotely while in the idle line or local conditions. The loop path is shown in Figure 8 for both of these conditions. The incoming call causes the exchange to reverse the loop polarity. This causes the potential at the junction of CR1 and CR2 to change from -200 volts to approximately +200 volts. The potential causes the connect circuit to operate as described in 3.32
3.34 Low-Paper Circuit: If the paper in a teletypewriter has become low and the low-paper contacts operate, the junction of R12 and R13 will not be allowed to become positive. Q4 cannot be turned off, and a connection cannot be made. If low paper occurs during a call, the teletypewriter will remain in the connected state, since zero potential at the junction of R12 and R13 will not effect the connect circuit. A disconnect will occur in the normal manner, since CR3 will be reverse-biased to a negative potential at the junction of R12 and R13. If a call is initiated locally with a low-paper condition, the normal sequence of events will occur until a connection is attempted. When the exchange cannot connect, it will reverse the loop polarity, and the teletypewriter will return to the idle state.
E. Disconnect
3.35 Local Disconnect: Operation of the STOP push-button while in the connect condition opens contacts 4 and 5 which are in series with the loop, and breaks the loop. When the exchange recognizes the break, it reverses the loop polarity. The reverse polarity is blocked by CR2, and current flows through CR1 along the path shown in Figure 8. At point A a -200 volt potential is developed due to the current flow described in 3.26 through 3.28. This potential causes the connect circuit to turn off and the teletypewriter stops running open. The input to the motor delay timer becomes negative, and the timer will time out. After 0.55 second the motor control relay releases, and the motor will turn off.
3.36 Remote Disconnect: The operation of the circuits and the loop paths are the same as those described in 3.33. The STOP pushbutton is not operated locally, but the signal conditions appear identical to the local-remote control.
F. Local Off-Line Operation
3.37 When the teletypewriter is in the idle line condition, depressing the LOCAL pushbutton will cause the local circuit to turn on. If the control is in the proceed-to-dial or connect conditions, either CR13 or CR14 will prevent operation of the local circuit. When the local circuit does operate, the LOCAL lamp will light. K3 relay contacts 2 and 3 will short out K2 relay contacts 1 and 2 located in the keyboard selector magnet driver loop. Current in this loop will then flow through R23, K3 rclay contacts 2 and 3, the keyboard, and the selector magnet driver to neutral. CR16 will be forward-biased causing the output transistor of the motor delay timer to turn on. The motor control relay will operate and the motor will start. The teletypewriter is now ready for off line operation. To return to the idle position, the STOP pushbutton should be depressed. STOP pushbutton contacts 1 and 2 open and turn off the local circuit. A call may be initiated in the usual manner. When the START pushbutton is depressed, its contacts 4 and 5 open and turn off the local circuit the same way as if che STOP pushbutton were used.
(a) If an incoming call is received while the teletypewriter is in the local condition, the action of the circuit is the same as that described in 3.30 through 3.32. The K2 relay operates to shunt the line through the keyboard distributor and selector magnet driver, but this operation cannot be accomplished since the K3 relay contacts 2 and 3 have shorted the K2 relay contacts 1 and 2 out of the circuit. Operation of the K3 relay contacts 4 and 5 will complete che 115 v ac circuit to the buzzer causing it to sound.
(b) With the connect circuit on. the collector of Qé will be near neutral. This causes the timer to start. At the end of a 2.3 second period, a positive pulse from the timer is coupled to the base of Q9 through C10 and CR17. This pulse will cause the local circuit to turn off. The LOCAL lamp will go out and K3 will release. The K3 contacts 1 and 2 will short the signal loop through the keyboard distributor and selector. The K3 relay contacts 4 and 5 will open and the buzzer will curn off. The teletypewriter is now in the connect condition.
POLAR ADAPTER
A. General
3.38 The following description is based upon schematic wiring diagram 5923WD.
3.39 The polar adapter converts the types of signals received from the receiving leg and the tcletypewriter into those usable by the circuitry and the sending leg. Some of the functions of the relay contacts are modified by the polar adapter, but they serve the same general purpose. The outward operations of the call control unit, with the polar adapter attached, are identical to those of the call control unit alone.
3.40 The polar adapter consists electrically of four basic parts. These parts are:
(a) Receiving pola: relay: This relay converts the received signals into those usable by the circuitry of the adapter and the call control unit.
(b) Sending polar relay: This relay converts the make-break signals generated by the distributor into transmitted line signals.
(c) Connect control timer: This circuit is made up of four basic parts and differentiates between control and information signals.
(d) Current amplifier: This circuit amplifies the signals of the receiving polar relay to control the selector magnet driver.
3.41 The polar adapter operates on a 3-wire basis. Two of these wires are the sending and receiving legs. The third wire is an earth return for these two legs. The polar adapter will, therefore, not operate unless earth ground is supplied. The chassis of the polar adapter is grounded to the power supply. When installed in the call control unit, electrical connection is made through the chassis contact to the third wire in the power plug. This third wire in the power cord must be connected to a suitable earth ground.
3.42 The sending and receiving polar relays are of the nonbridging mercury-wetted contact type. They are housed in metal cylinders with an 11-pin tube socket at their base. Because of the mercury in the relay capsule, they must be operated within 30 degrees of vertical to prevent shorting of the contacts.
(a) The coils of the polar relay are as follows:
Pins no. 2 and 11 - Drive coil
Pins no. 3 and 10 - Drive coil
Pins no. 5 and 9 - Bias coil
Pins no. 6 and 8 - Bias coil
Pins no. 1 and 7 - Contacts
Pin no. 4 - Tongue
(b) In the polar adapter, contact no. 7 has been chosen as the spacing contact and contact no. 1 as the marking contact. To close contact no. 1 and the tongue, current must flow from either pins no. 2 to 11, 3 to 10, 9 to 5, or 8 to 6.
3.43 All polar relay contacts are protected by arc suppressors. These arc suppressors slow the rate of change of voltage across the mercury-wetted contacts of the polar relays. On the receiving polar relay the arc suppressors are made up of R32, R33, C5, and C6. On the sending polar relay they are made up of R43, R44, C7, and C8.
3.44 All voltage sources are isolated by at least 120 ohms. In the event of a momentary short, current through the polar relay contacts or the connectors is limited to 1 ampere or less. If a short is of long duration, the resistor will act like a fuse and open the shorted circuit. These resistors are R34, R36, R38, R41, and R42.
3.45 When polar signals are being transmitted by the sending polar relay, a noise suppressor is used in the sending leg. This suppressor consists of a "pi" filter and is made up of C11A, C11B, and R45. The filter rejects all high frequency components of the transmitted signal. It is not used when neutral signals are transmitted.
B. Receiving Polar Relay
3.46 This polar relay and its associated components convert incoming signals into those usable by the circuitry of the polar adapter and the call control unit.
3.47 Several types of input signals to this polar relay are possible. These modes of operation may be selected by appropriate strapping of the binding posts on the TP181607 printed card assembly. The various modes of operation are:
(a) Polar signals, battery supplied remotely. This is the normal mode of operation, and all polar adapters are supplied with strapping for this type of operation.
(b) Neutral signals, battery supplied by the polar adapter. In this condition, posts no. 3 and 4, 5 and 7, and 12 and 13 are strapped together.
(c) Neutral signals, battery supplied remotely (battery negative). In this condition, posts no. 5 and 12, 6 and 13, and 3 and 4 are strapped together.
(d) Neutral signals, battery supplied remotely (battery positive). In this condition, posts no. 3 and 4, 12 and 13, and 5 and 6 are strapped together.
3.48 With the wiring as described in 3.47, a spacing signal will cause the tongue (4) of the polar relay to rest on the space contact (7). With a marking signal, the tongue will rest on the mark contact (1). The tongue (4) of the polar relay is supplied with +120 volts through R34. It supplies this voltage to the selected contact, while the other contact has no potential applied. Both contacts have two outputs. One of these is a voltage or direct output, while the other is current output. The current output is through a diode and a resistor and will supply approximately 0.010 ampere to ground. The diode prevents reversed currents from flowing when the contact is not supplied with +120 volts from the tongue. The output diodes and resistors are CR11, CR12, R30, and R31.
3.49 The bias for this relay, when used in neutral operation, is 0.030 ampere and is supplied through R37 and strapped terminals no. 3 and 4. Operating current for neutral operation, when supplied locally, is supplied from -120 volts and is limited to 0.060 ampere by R46 and the signal line resistance.
C. Sending Polar Relay
3.50 This polar relay converts the neutral make-break signal generated by the distributor and the dial into those required on the sending leg. There are a variety of possible signal types that can be transmitted. These are:
(a) Polar signals, battery supplied by the polar adapter. This is the normal mode of operation and all polar adapters are supplied with strapping for this type of operation.
(b) Neutral signals, battery supplied by the polar adapter. In this condition, posts no. 10 and 11 are strapped together, and the straps between posts no. 8 and 9, 14 and 15, and 16 and 17 are cut.
(c) Neutral signals, battery supplied remotely. In this condition posts no. 6 and 10 are strapped together, and straps between posts no. 8 and 9, 10 and 11, 14 and 15, and 16 and 17 are cut.
(d) Since both the drive and bias windings are wired in series, both windings are supplied with the same amount of current. The input current of 0.021 ampere to the drive windings is supplied through R40 from +120 volts. The 0.021 ampere to the bias is supplied through R39 from +120 volts.
D. Connect Control Timer
3.51 This circuit consists of four basic parts on the TP181606 assembly. These are: a strobe pulse generator, two timing transmission gates, and binary.
3.52 The strobe pulse generator generates a 120 Hz square wave. This square wave and the outputs from the receiving polar relay are used as inputs to the two timing transmission gates. The outputs of these two gates are used ta control the binary. The output is used to control the connect circuit in the call control unit.
3.53 The strobe pulse generator is made up of Q1 and Q2 and associated components. It is controlled and caused to oscillate by alternating current from the power transformer of the call control unit. This 12.5-volt ac (18-volt peak) sine wave is rectified by CR1 and CR2 to form a negative 120 Hz wave. The base of Q1 is biased by R2 and R3 such that -3.9 volts is necessary at the junction of CR1 and CR2 to turn on Q1. When base current does flow to Q1, it will turn on, and its collector will become nearly ground. R4 and R5 form a voltage divider which back-biases the base of Q2 and holds it off. The voltage at the collector of Q2 will be set by a voltage divider made up of R8 and R9. This voltage is -9.1 volts. Feedback, through R6 from the collector of Q2 to the base of Q1, will help provide snap-action.
3.54 When the 120 Hz sine wave becomes more positive than -3.9 volts, base current to Q1 will cease to flow. The collector of Q1 will now have a potential of -5.7 volts. Current will now flow through R5 to the base of Q2 and cause the transistor to turn on. The collector of Q2 will now be very close to a neutral potential. This circuit will continue to oscillate as long as power is applied to the control unit transformer.
3.55 Two, 1-percent tolerance resistors (R8 and R9) in the collector of Q2, set the voltage at that point at -9.1 volts. This voltage level is important in controlling the binary and setting the proper time delay intervals in the timing gates. The square wave generated at the collector of Q2 will be ground for approximately 0.0013 second and -9.1 volts for approximately 0.007 second.
3.56 When spacing signal is present on the receiving leg, +120 volts is applied to contact no. 7 and no voltage is applied to contact no. 1 of the receiving polar relay. No voltage will appear across R28, and the voltage at the junction of R28 and R26 is set by current flow through CR10 and R26. This voltage will be approximately -60 volts. CR8 will conduct and the voltage across C3 and at the anode of CR5 will be held at -60 volts. If Q4 is in conduction, its base will be nearly ground, and CRS will be back-biased by 60 volts.
3.57 The 9.1 volt strobe pulse introduced at C1 will cause the voltage at the anode of CRS5 to rise to -50.9 volts. The negative pulse, that follows in 0.0013 second will lower it to -60 volts. The net result of these strobe pulses upon the voltage on C3 is, therefore, zero, and CRS5 is not forward-biased at this time.
3.58 When a marking signal appears on the receiving leg, a positive potential of 120 is applied to one side of R28 through the marking contacts of the receiving polar relay. The voltage divider of R26 and R28 will have a +22 volt potential at its junction and reverse-bias CR8. This action will isolate C3 from R26 and R28 and it will begin to discharge through R20 from a -60 volt potential toward ground. The anode voltage of CRS will respond to the discharging, reducing its reverse-bias condition. After approximately 0.08 second the voltage on C3, and therefore the anode of CR5, will have risen to -9.1 volts. The next strobe pulse to appear at C1 will cause CR5 to become forward-biased, and part of the pulse will appear at the base of Q4.
3.59 The gate just described is the connect timing gate and produces a signal delay of approximately 0.08 second. The disconnect timing gate operates in a similar manner. The input to R27 is from the spacing contact. When mark appears on the receiving leg, R25 and CR9 hold the voltage on C4 at -60 volts. When a spacing signal appears, CR7 will be back-biased, and C4 will discharge through R19 from -60 volts toward ground. In approximately 1.3 seconds the voltage across C4, and therefore at the anode of CR4, will become more positive than -9.1 volts. The next strobe pulse introduced across C2 will cause CR4 to be forward-biased, and part of the strobe pulse will appear at the base of Q3. 3.60 C3 will recharge to -60 volts from -9.1 volts in 0.004 second. C4 will recharge in 0.01 second. Both of these recharge times are less than one code element length and can be considered instantaneous.
3.61 The outputs of the transmission gates control the binary which is made up of Q3 and Q4 and associated components. The operation of this binary is similar to that of the binaries in the call control unit. The control of the binary by the transmission gates is the same as that of the 2.3-second timer controlling the local circuit in the call control unit. A positive pulse at the base of Q4, through CRS, will turn off Q4 and turn on Q3. The collector of Q3 will then be near ground, Current will flow through R35 and through ZD1 to the collector of Q3. The cathode of ZD1 will be +9.1 volts with respect to its anode, so that the voltage at the cathode will be +9.1 volts. This point is the output to the connect circuit of the call control unit.
3.62 A positive pulse at the base of Q3 through CR4 will turn off Q3 and turn on Q4. The collector of Q3 will go negative. Current flow through CR6 and R23 will hold this voltage to -18 volts. Current flow through R35 and ZD1 will hold the voltage at the cathode of ZD1 to +9.1 volts of -18 volts. The output will then be -8.9 volts. A negative output (Q3 off) will hold the connect circuit of the call control unit off, and a positive output (Q3 off) will hold the connect circuit of the call control unit off, and a positive output (Q3 on) will hold the connect circuit on.
E. Current Amplifier 
3.63 This circuit is made up of Q5 and associated components on the TP181606 assembly. Base current to this amplifier is supplied through CR12 and R31 from the marking contact of the receiving polar relay.
3.64 If ground is applied to the emitter of Q5 through CR3 or by strapping binding posts no. 1 and 2, the base is reverse-biased by the voltage divider made up of R13 and R14. If base current is now supplied, the transistor will turn on. With the collector load as shown in Figure 12, 0.060 ampere of collector current will flow.
3.65 If the ground to the emitter of Q5 through CR3 is switched to +120 volts, CR3 will become back-biased. The emitter is biased to near +18 volts through R12. Since both the emitter and collector are biased to +18 volts, no current will flow between them. Base current supplied to the transistor will flow into both the collector and emitter. The current in the collector will flow from the base, through the collector, the selector magnet driver, and R23 to +18 volts. This current flow is in the reverse direction of the normal control current for the selector magnet drive, and it will be held spacing.
3.66 The amplifier will supply marking current only when ground is applied to the emitter, and the base current is supplied. If either of these conditions is not fulfilled, the selector magnet driver will not be supplied input current, and its output will be spacing.
3.67 Strapping posts no. 1 and 2 will permanently apply ground to the emitter and allow duplex operation of the teletypewriter.
F. Circuit Interconnections
3.68 Figure 10 is a block diagram showing the polar adapter connected to the call control unit. The call control unit portion of the block diagram is the same as that shown in Figure 7 with one exception. The line sensing and control block of the call control unit is now called the sending loop control. All of the components are identical in these two blocks, but rewiring allows the block to control the sending leg rather than the signal loop. This block also has outputs to the current amplifier and the selector magnet driver. The input to the current amplifier allows the teletypewriter to read its own copy. The input directly to the selector magnet driver is for teletypewriter blinding.
3.69 The receiving polar relay marking contact supplies inputs to both the connect control timer and the current amplifier. The input to the current amplifier allows the teletypewriter to read incoming copy. The input to the connect control timer allows the polar adapter to recognize a connect signal. The spacing contact supplies inputs to both the connect control timer and the proceed-to-dial circuit of the call control unit. The input to the connect control timer allows the polar adapter to recognize a disconnect signal. The input to the proceed-to-dial circuit supplies current for spacing signals and no current for mark. This allows this circuit to operate in the normal manner.
G. Idle Line Condition,
3.70 In this condition both the sending and receiving legs are spacing. All the circuits in the call control unit are off. The spacing contact of the receiving polar relay is +120 volts and allows C4 to be discharged. CR4 will then allow strobe pulses to pass to the base of Q3 and hold it off. The output of the connect control timer is then negative and holds the connect circuit in the call control unit off.
3.71 Figure 11 is a schematic wiring diagram of the sending loop control circuit with the current amplifier and the sending polar relay. Blinding current to the selector magnet driver flows from +18 volts through R23, J5-2, the selector magnet driver, J4-3, and "hl" contact, the "wl" contact, J4-9, and the distributor to ground. No current flows in the drive coils of the sending polar relay, since neither the start contact, the "a" contact, nor the "hl" contact are operated to supply ground.
3.72 The marking contact of the receiving polar relay has no voltage applied. No base current will then flow from this contact to Q5. The emitter of Q5 is biased to +18 volts through R12. The cathode of CR3 is at +120 volts which is supplied through R39 and the sending relay coils, and CR3 is back-biased.
H. Initiating a Call
3.73 A call may be initiated when the call control unit is in either the idle line or local conditions as described earlier. Depressing the START pushbutton will allow current to flow through the drive coils of the sending polar relay. This sending polar relay will then transmit a marking signal on the sending leg. The current path through the coils is shown by the dotted line in Figure 11.
3.74 Operating the START pushbutton will also remove ground from the collector of Q1 in the call control mit. Current to the [...] of the [...] circuit (base of Q1) is supplied from the spacing contact of the receiving polar relay. This is not shown in Figure 11. The proceed to-dial circuit will not operate until this current is interrupted.
I. Proceed-to-Dial
3.75 The exchange will recognize the marking signal transmitted as a request to dial. When the exchange has selected the proper equipment, it will transmit a 0.025 second marking signal on the receiving leg. The receiving polar relay will respond to this signal by interrupting the current flow to the input of che proceed-to-dial circuit. This circuit will then turn on, and energize the (K1) relay and the proceed-to-dial lamp. The "a" contact will operate and shunt out the START pushbutton contact. The START pushbutton may now be released.
3.76 When the receiving polar relay responds to the 0.025 second pulse, C3 in the connect control timer will start to discharge. After 0.025 second the receiving leg returns to spacing and causes C3 to be recharged to -60 volts. In the 0.025 second interval, the voltage across C3 will not rise to -9.1 volts, and no strobe pulse will be passed by CR5. The connect control timer, therefore, will not respond to a proceed-to-dial pulse.
J. Dialing
3.77 The dial signaling contacts are in series with the drive coils of the sending polar relay as shown in Figure 11. The dial contacts will thus energize and deenergize this relay whenever current is flowing through them. The make-break signal generated by the dial contacts will be transmitted as mark-space signals by the sending polar relay. These mark-space signals are used by the exchange to make the necessary connection.
K. Call Connection
3.78 With the call control unit in the proceed-to-dial condition, the sending leg is marking, and the receiving leg is spacing. When dialing is completed, the exchange will switch the receiving leg to marking. This signal causes the tongue of the receiving polar relay to transfer and. apply +120 volts to R28. CR8 will become reverse-biased, and C3 will begin to discharge toward ground. After 0.080 second, the voltage across C3 will be approximately -9.1 volts. The next strobe pulse to appear will pass through CR5 to the base of Q4. The output of the connect control timer will then become positive and cause the connect circuit to turn on. As described earlier, the proceed-to-dial circuit will turn off. As the connect circuit turns on, the (K2) relay will operate, the "hl" contacts will transfer, the CONN lamp will light, and the motor will turn on.
3.79 Current flow to the drive coils of the sending polar relay is now through R40, the drive coils, the dial contacts, CR2, the stop contacts, K1, K2, and the keyboard contacts to ground as shown in Figure 12. Base current to Q5 is now supplied from the marking contact of the receiving polar relay through CR12 and R31. Input current to the selector magnet driver will flow from +18 volts through R23, the selector magnet driver, Q5, CR3, CR2, the stop contacts, K1, K2, and the distributor contacts to ground.
3.80 Both the current paths for the drive coils of the sending polar relay and the selector magnet driver are through the distributor contacts. If the distributor is operated, the signal will be transmitted on the sending leg and cause the selector magnet of the teletypewriter to operate. When information is received from the distant station, the receiving polar relay will operate and make or break base current to Q5. This will cause Q5 to make or break current flow to the selector magnet driver without affecting the sending circuit.
3.81 The longest possible normal spacing signal generated by the distant teletypewriter will be less than 1.3 seconds. This is the length of spacing signal required to cause the connect control timer to disconnect. Therefore, under normal signaling, the connect control timer will not be affected by information signals.
L. Remote Connection
3.82 The call control unit may be connected remotely from either the idle line or local condition. An incoming call is indicated by the exchange by its transmission of a marking signal on the receiving leg. The connect control timer after 0.080 second, will turn on the connect circuit in the control unit. A current path to ground is set up through the drive coils of the sending polar relay. It will then transmit a marking signal on the sending leg to signify that the unit has connected. The remainder of the operations are the same as described in 3.78 through 3.81.
3.83 If the paper in the teletypewriter has become low and the low-paper contacts operate, the voltage across C3 will be held at -60 volts through R 29. This will stop any connections from occurring. If the call control unit is already in the connect condition, when the low-paper contacts close the call may be completed, but subsequent connections will be blocked.
3.84 If a call is originated locally with a low-paper condition, the normal sequence of events will occur until the connection is attempted. When the exchange does not receive a marking signal on the sending leg, it will turn the receiving leg to spacing (idle line condition).
M. Call Disconnect
3.85 If the STOP pushbutton is depressed while the teletypewriter is in the connect condition, the stop contacts in series with the drive coils of the sending polar relay will open. The relay output will then be spacing. The exchange will recognize this long spacing signal as a request to disconnect and will send a spacing signal on the receiving leg. The receiving polar relay contacts will transfer and allow C4 to discharge toward ground. After 1.3 seconds, the voltage across C4 will be -9.1 volts, and the next strobe pulse will pass thyough CR4 to the base of Q3. The output of the timer will become negative and turn off the connect circuit in the call control unit. Current to the drive coil of the sending polar relay will be held off so that the STOP pushbutton may be released. The K2 contacts will now also supply blinding current to the selector magnet driver. The control unit is now in the idle line condition.
N. Remote Disconnect
3.86 When the remote unit generates the spacing signal to disconnect, the receiving polar relay will allow C4 to discharge and after 1.3 seconds the timer will turn off the connect circuit. The K2 contacts will transfer, stopping current flow to the drive coils of the sending polar relay and blinding the selector magnet driver. The call control unit is now in the idle line condition.
3.87 This operation is identical to that of the call control unit without polar adapter except for the current path to the selector magnet driver. This path is shown in Figure 11.

4. PRIVATE WIRE SERVICE
INTRODUCTION
4.01 Power for the motor, sclector magnet driver, local power supply, and tape reader power pack, when provided, is supplied from fused 115-volt ac, 60 Hz power. Direct current of either 0.020 or 0.060 ampere is required for the signal line(s) and for operation in the local mode. Battery for the signal line(s) is supplied by the customer's facilities, while local battery for operation in the local mode is furnished through the operation of the local power supply circuit in the call control unit. At the rear of the call control unit is a terminal strip which provides the point of entry for the ac power and the signal line(s) into the teletypewriter.
4.02 The purpose of the selector magnet driver is to amplify received DC marking and spacing intelligence pulses. Received dc intelligence pulses are directed to the input of the selector magnet driver circuit in the call control unit where they are amplified and returned as 0.500 ampere dc intelligence pulses to operate the typing unit selector. A detailed description of the operation of a selector magnet driver is given in 2.92 through 2.102. The selector magnet driver described there is similar to the ones used in private wire service.
A. Power Switch and Local Power Supply Circuits
4.03 The 3-position rotary switch (electronically shown in Figure 13) is the only manual control on the call control unit. Through its operation the teletypewriter can be (1) placed in the external signal line loop for communication with other teletypewriters, (2) removed from the external signal line loop for local operation, or (3) placed in the off condition.
B. Mode Chart
4.04 The following chart indicates the condition of the rotary power switch contacts — either open or closed — when the control knob is turned to one of its positions:
B. Signal Circuit
4.06 The signal line is diverted around the local teletypewriter so other teletypewriters in the external signal line loop can communicate without interference.
LOCAL MODE
A. Power Circuit
4.07 The line relay is not energized and the local battery is supplied to the selector magnet driver and the send circuit.
B. Signal Circuit
4.08 The normally closed contacts A remain closed, and the normally open contacts B remain open. The external signal line loop is divorced from the selector magnet driver, and shunted so that other telety pewriters in that loop can communicate without being affected by the operation of the local teletypewriter.
LINE MODE
A. Power Circuit
4.09 The line relay is energized and the battery is on the signal line.
B. Signal Circuit
4.10 The normally closed contacts A will open and the normally open contacts B will close. The external signal line loop is united with the selector magnet driver and the local teletypewriter can now communicate any other teletypewriters in that loop.
4.11 Any transmission from the keyboard or tape reader, if provided, will cause the typing unit distributor to send start-stop signals to other teletypewriters in the external signal line loop. Also, the local telety pewriter is able to receive the start-stop signals transmitted from other teletypewriters in the same external line loop.
Note: Retain the forward mounting screw and associated flatwasher. This screw is used to secure the typing unit when shipped to another location without its cover fastened in place. The screw and washer may be stored in the TP181104 cable clip (included in bag of hardware with pedestal mounted units) to be mounted on the typing unit frame between the two dashpot mounting screws (Figure 1).
1.08 Remove typing unit from the shipping pallet.
CAUTION: DO NOT TILT THE TYPING UNIT AFTER IT HAS BEEN REMOVED FROM THE PALLET. THE TYPING UNIT FLOATS ON RUBBER ISOLATORS AND MAY PULL LOOSE IF IT IS TILTED.
PREPARATION FOR INSTALLATION
1.09 Remove the tape from across the top of the cover and take out the cables, platen knob, and paper spindle from the paper recess. Unwrap the parts.
TP181104
CABLE CLIP
1.10 Remove the call control bezel, if used, after removing its two mounting screws. Remove volume control knob or power switch rotary knob, if used, by pulling knob forward. Detach the nameplate (Figure 2) by pulling it down and out. Remove the four front and three rear cover mounting screws.
Note: On Automatic Send-Receive (ASR) Sets, remove the screw from the left rear corner of the tape reader cover. Gently lift the cover from the subbase.
1.11 Remove the twist tie holding the carriage to the left side frame of the typing unit.
1.12 If a stand is used, remove its two rear panel mounting screws and take panel off. Remove the copyholder, if used, from inside the: stand. Remove the bag tied to the stand and place its hardware contents on the bench.
1.13 Use the supplied screws to fasten the data set, if used, to the relay rack.
1.14 The teletypewriter set should be thoroughly lubricated before placing it into service and relubricated after the short period of Service Specified in the lubrication sections. Thereafter, maintain the regular lubrication intervals as required in the appropriate lubrication sections.

2. INSTALLATION
MOUNTING TYPING UNIT ON STAND
2.01 If the teletypewriter set is to be bolted to the floor, remove the front screw in each leg of the stand (Figure 3).
2.02 Install the plug button, included in the bag of hardware, in the forward hole in the bottom of the subbase.
2.03 Place the subbase and typing unit on top of the stand so that its back edges and sides line up with the back edgesand sides of the stand. Install the two retaining clips, included in the hardware bag, on the base at the rear (one each end) and snap them in place on the stand. Refer to Figure 4. Mount the base to the stand from the bottom with four no.14Z screws and associated flat washers.
2.04
CODING THE ANSWER-BACK DRUM
2.05 To remove answer-back drum for coding, press back and down on the tab portion of the TP180854 brace until it becomes detented in its open position. Lift feed pawl slightly (do not overextend its spring) and remove drum.
2.06 Code the answer-back drum in a counter-clockwise direction (Figures 5 and 6), starting with row no. 1.
Note: The ST row is the first row sensed at the beginning of an answer-back cycle. It is coded at the factory for character suppression and must not be recoded.
2.07 A particular character is coded by either retaining or removing tines within a row, as illustrated in Figure 5. A tine may be removed by either of the two following methods:
(a) Method 1: Place the end of a screwdriver blade at the base of a tine in the row previously coded. Press the side of the blade against the top of the unwanted tine until the tine breaks off. Figure 5 illustrates this method — pressure applied to base of row no. 18 and against top of adjacent tine being removed from row no. 19.
(b) Method 2: Place the unwanted tine in the slot of a TP161686 tine tool, or grasp the tine firmly with long-nose pliers. With the tool or pliers held stationary, rotate the answer-back drum back and forth until the unwanted tine breaks off near its base. Do not damage adjacent tines.
Note: If a coding error is made, or for some other reason it is necessary to suppress (erase) characters from the answer-back drum, remove the character suppression tine from the row/(s) affected.
Note 1: Blank space indicates no change from latest editon.
Note 2: Codes shown are for even parity operation — for nonparity, remove eighth level tine.
2.08 The length of an answer-back sequence can be varied either by removing the stop cam tine(s) and/or the character suppression tine(s).
(a) For short sequences, code the drum for either 2- or 3-cycle operation by removing the appropriate tine(s) as indicated in Figure 6.
(b) Removal of the character suppression tine from any row prevents transmission from the answer-back mechanism. To shorten the answer-back sequence, remove the suppression tine from any unused row(s) after the end of a message.
Note: Do not remove the character suppression tine from the last row of each segment of the answer-back drum — row no. 20 for answer-back drums coded for 1-cycle operation — on sets used in systems where a response to each answer-back activation signal must be obtained. The last row can be coded with any other character that is compatible with the particular system.
2.09 The number of rows available for message coding is shown below for 1-, 2-, or 3-cycle operation.
2.10 The number of rows available for actual station identification is less than shown above, because each coded message should begin and end with CARRIAGE RETURN and LINE FEED (this may be altered in specific applications). This assures that the transmitted message will appear at the beginning of a line of the receiving teletypewriter set and eliminates overprinting. :
2.11 In switched network service, the station identification for 1-cycle operation may not exceed 14 characters, including spaces. The answer-back drum should be coded as follows.
ABBREVIATION KEY TO ABBREVIATION
ACK Acknowledge
CR Carriage Return
LF Line Feed
RO Rub Out
SP Space
SUP Character Suppression
(a) Example 1:
SUP CR LF RO
TELETYPE SP NILES CR LF ACK
Company City
Station Identification
(Maximum-14 characters)
Note: In this system, the ACK character code combination must be the final significant character code combination in the coded answer-back mesSage.
(b) Example 2:
SUP CR LF RO
ERIE SP BOST CR LF ACK SUP
SUP SUP SUPSUP
Company City
Station Identification
(Less than maximum number of characters)
Note: If the station identification is less than the maximum of 14 characters in length, then the remaining rows on the answer-back drum must be coded with the character suppression code according to Example 2 above.
2.12 To replace the answer-back drum, place the TP180854 brace in its detented open position, and lift feed pawl (do not overextend its spring). Replace drum with its shaft firmly seated in the contact block slots. Release feed pawl and TP180854 brace. Rotate answer-back drum to assure proper seating of its associated parts. Check that the contact wires are located in their proper slots.
ELECTRICAL CONNECTIONS AND  PRE-SERVICE PROCEDURES
CAUTION: MAKE SURE POWER CORD IS NOT CONNECTED.
2.13 Refer to the appropriate wiring diagrams packed with the teletypewriter set.
2.14 Connect the signal line leads (supplied by customer) to the terminals on the terminal board at the rear of the call control unit as indicated in the wiring diagram.
2.15 Connect power cord to an acsource, 115 volt 60 Hz.
2.16 Check DASHPOT ORIFICE (Spacing Area) adjustment, since altitude may have some effect on dashpot operation. See Section 974-122-700TC.
2.17 Sets equipped withan answer-back mechanism must be tested for proper response to a predetermined call character suchas WRU. The following procedure is recommended for performing this test.
(a) Use a predetermined call character such as WRU, to callin the newly installed set.
(b) The set should establish the connection and automatically transmit the answer-back message.
Note: Set will not respond if the suppression tine has been removed from the last row. See 2.07 (b).
(c) If proper response is not obtained, check and correct the answer-back area adjustments (Section 574-122-700TC), beginning with those of the following list.
DRUM POSITION
TRIP LEVER CLEARANCE
FEED PAWL POSITION
FEED LEVER POSITION
"HERE-IS" BELLCRANK POSITIONING
TRIP BAIL POSITIONING
CHARACTER SUPPRESSION CONTACT
WIRE GAP
2.18 The 33 Teletypewriter Sets are shipped from the factory with the automatic carriage return-line feed feature in the typing unit disabled by means of clips. The clips mount over slots in the TP180950 front tie bar. To enable this feature on friction feed sets remove the clip over slot A. To enable this feature on sprocket feed sets remove the two clips, in slot A and slot L.
Note: Slot A is not stamped on the function casting. Refer to 574-122-700TC for orientation.
2.19 Connect the signal line leads (supplied by customer) to the terminals on the terminal board at the rear of the call control unit as indicated in the wiring diagram.
2.20 The 33 Teletypewriter Sets are shipped from the factory with the even parity option installed in the keyboard. The customer may:
(a) Retain even parity, or
(b) Wire the keyboard for the 8th bit always marking, or
(c) Wire the keyboard for the 8th bit always spacing.
The wiring options are installed by connecting wires to terminals at the right front of the keyboard and at the left contact block (see Figure 7). The options are shown in the Keyboard Wiring Options Table.
2.21 Low Tape Contact Adjustments (for units so equipped):
(a) Operating Arm Adjustment (Figure 8): Replace cover. With tape spindle in place, there should be 5/16 inch to 7/16 inch clearance between operating arm and tape spindle. To adjust, bend operating arm.
(b) Operating Arm Clearance (Figure 9): Remove cover. The operating arm should havea minimum of 1/8 inch clearance between the left edge of the operating arm at the closest point and the cables and cable restrainer at the left rear corner of the set. Gauge by eye. To adjust, bend switch bracket and/or reposition cables and reform cable restrainer.
(c) Operating Arm Clearance (Figure 10): Install cover. The tape roll should not touch the operating arm at any point other than the activating portion of the arm. To adjust, bend switch bracket and/or reposition cables and reform cable restrainer.
2.22 Air Deflector (Motor Area) Adjustment:
Note: This adjustment applies to 50 Hz sets only (So equipped).
(a) There should be at least 1/8 inch clearance at closest point between air deflector and motor fan. To adjust, position and/or bend air deflector.
(b) There should be some clearance between air deflector and the low paper alarm sensing rod so that the air deflector does not interfere or restrict the total travelof the sensing rod. To adjust, position and/or bend air deflector.
2.23 Connect power cord to ac source, 115 volt, 60 Hz or 50 Hz.
PLACEMENT
A. Without Stand
2.24 If a stand is not included, place the teletypewriter set on the surface where it is to be used.
B. With Stand
2.25 Figure 3 illustrates the facilities for leveling and anchoring the stand.
2.26 #£Place the partially assembled set where it is to be used. If the set rocks to one Side or another, tip it slightly and reposition the leveling screws.
Note: Reaction to the carriage returning to its left position may cause early design teletypewriter sets to move across the floor toward the left. To correct this, either add weight to the stand, arrange to have it bolted to the floor, or drill one 0.328 inch diameter hole into each leg and install TP182285 rubber bumper in each leg.
2.27 If the teletypewriter set is to be bolted to the floor, place stand at the desired location and drive lag bolts into the floor through — the front holes in the legs.
2.28 Place the relay rack inside the stand.

3. FINAL ASSEMBLY
GENERAL
3.01 Replace the back panel onto the stand, if used, using the removed screws.
Note: Before replacing an ASR cover, remove the retaining clip (early design units only) from the tape reader upstop screw (Figure 15). Also, prepare the punch for manual or automatic operation as described in 6.01.
3.02 Replace the cover over the typing unit and onto the subbase (Figure 2). Take care that all seams are tight and that keyboard pushbuttons, dial, etc, are properly aligned. Insert and tighten the cover mounting screws removed during PREPARATION FOR INSTALLATION.
Note: Onan ASR Set, insert and tighten screw at left rear corner of tape reader cover.
3.03 Replace the nameplate making sure that the formed lip fits around the bottom of the flange on the cover, that the top edge is behind the small lipon the cover, and that the bottom of the nameplate rests ontop of the two small projections on the subbase.
3.04 Replace the volume control knob or the power switch rotary knob, if either is used, by positioning and pushing it rearward.
3.05 Position the bezel, if used, on the cover over the call control unit. Insert and tighten its two mounting screws.
3.06 On friction feed typing units, align the platen knob with the flat on the left side of the platen. Push knob in place. On sprocket feed typing units, install platen knob onleft side of platen. Fully seat knob to the right and secure it with the screw provided.
RIBBON INSTALLATION
3.07 Figure 11 illustrates ribbon threading.
3.08  Raise the cover lid. Pull both spools off the friction spindles.
3.09 Engage the hook at the end of the ribbon in the hub of the empty spool; if there is no hook, pierce the end of the ribbon over the point of the arrow in the hub of the empty spool. Wind a few turns of ribbon onto the empty spool in the direction indicated by the arrow, and make sure that the reversing eyelet has been wound upon the spool.
3.10 Place the spools on the shafts in such a manner that the ribbon feeds to the rear from the right side of the right spool and from the left side of the left spool. Turn each spool slightly until the spool driving pin engages the hole in the spool. Guide the ribbon around the right vertical post and through the slot in the reverse arm. Place the ribbon in the ribbon guide behind the typewheel. Guide the ribbon through the left side of the reverse arm and around the vertical post. Rotate the spool to take up any slack.
PAPER OR FORM INSTALLATION
A. Friction Feed
3.11 A frictionfeed teletypewriter set accommodates a standard roll of paper 8-1/2 inches wide and 5 inches in diameter. Figure 12 illustrates paper threading for a friction feed typing unit.
3.12 Insert the paper roll spindle into the roll of paper so that an equal length of spindle is exposed at either end of the roll. Place roll into the cover recess with the ends of the spindle resting in the slots so that the paper will unroll from the bottom.
3.13 Raise the cover lid. Release pressure roller tension by moving the pressure lever forward. Prepare a smooth leading edge of paper. Pass paper over paper straightener, under platen, and under paper guide. Straighten paper and reapply the pressure roller tension. Close the cover lid.
Note: When typing units are stored or out of service for an extended period of time, release the pressure roller tension.
B. Sprocket Feed
3.14 A sprocket feed teletypewriter set accommodates forms 8-1/2 inches wide and of various lengths. The forms are normally passed to the typing unit from a conveniently located supply at the rear of the set.
3.15 Place the paper roll spindle into the paper recess of the cover so that it rests in the slots provided.
PAPER
3.16 Figure 13 illustrates form threading for a sprocket feed typing unit.
3.17 Form Threading: Raise the cover lid. Pass the leading edge of the first form under the paper roll spindle. Thread the form under the low-paper and paper-out arms, if used, and between the platen and paper guideplate. Guide the form squarely into the platen and rotate the platen until the form is advanced by the sprocket pins. Lift up the wire guide and continue to rotate the platen until the form is under the wire guide and positioned for the first typing line. Lower wire guide and cover lid. After the first form is fed out, lift the form over the paper roll spindle to separate the incoming forms from the outgoing forms.
3.18 Figure 14 illustrates the zeroizing position of the platen drive mechanism for one cam lobe operation. For platen drive mechanisms using more than one cam lobe, see the CAM ZERO POSITION (Platen Drive Area, Sprocket Feed Mechanism) adjustment in Section 074-122-700TC.
3.19 Zeroized Position: Position a form at its first printing line in the typing unit. Depress the zeroizing button and rotate the pulley until the index plate is lined up with the pointer. Release the zeroizing button.
Mechanism
Note 1: To initiate the action to feed out a form, depress the CTRL and FORM keytops. The form-out mechanism will not respond to successive commands to feed out a form. At the end of a form feed-out, advance the form at least one line before issuing a second form-out command.
Note 2: The typing unit, in an ASR Set, operates one cycle behind the tape reader. Thus, a nonprint fill in code selection is required immediately after each form-out selection for proper set operation.
4. TAPE READER
4.01 A retaining ring or clip (Figure 15) is assembled (on early design units) to the upstop screw to prevent the sensing pins from being dislodged during shipment. This retaining clip must be removed before placing the tape reader in operation.
4.02 When inserting tape into the tape reader prior to operation, allow enough slack in the tape between the tape punch and the reader so that the reader lid can be easily closed.
One Cam Lobe Operation
CAUTION: THE TAPE READER OPERATES UNDER HIGH VOLTAGE. PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES SHOULD BE TAKEN WHENEVER POWER TO THE TAPE READER IS TURNED ON. HIGH VOLTAGE FROM THE POWER PACK WILL CONTINUE UNTIL APPROXIMATELY 10 SECONDS AFTER THE TAPE READER HAS BEEN DISCONNECTED.
4.03 Do not place the control lever beyond the STOP position while the tape reader is operating under power. The reader must come to a complete stop before placing the control lever in the FREE position.
5. POWER PACK ASSEMBLY
5.01 The sets have the power pack for the tape reader mounted in the call control unit; therefore, no installation is required. Should it be desirable to place other equipment in the call control unit, the reader power pack may be mounted inside the stand, underneath the base. Two clips attach the power pack to the stand at the left front corner when the set is viewed rom the rear. See Figure 16.
5.02 The auxiliary ASR power supply is mounted in the enclosure of the stand. It is used in the off-line mode to provide 115 volts on the tape reader, answer-back, and distributor contacts when a tape reader is used. When the tape reader is not used, a plug with a jumper wire is inserted in position R2 at the rear of the call control unit. (a) For 2-inch inside diameter tape rolls,
6. TAPE PUNCH use the tube-type spool.
6.01 The 33 Teletypewriter Sets are shipped (bo) For 1l-inch inside diameter tape rolls, with the tape punch having two disabling use the 2-piece spool. clips installed in slots A-O and A-8. If manual operation of the tape punch is desired, retain (c) Place the tape and spool into the tape the two clips; if automatic operation is desired, punch cover so that the leading edge of remove the two clips. See Figure 17. the tape is at the top of the roll.
(a) Assemble the chad box under the tape punch pan by inserting the back of the flanged surface between the stand and the typing unit subbase.
(b) Push the chad box toward the rear until the bent surface located at the front of the chad box engages the stand. An embossing located on the front bottom surface of the flanged surface engages an oblong hole in the stand and holds the chad box in place.
(c) To empty the chad box, lift the front slightly and pull the chad box toward the front until it becomes disengaged.
7. RESHIPMENT
7.01 If the teletypewriter set is to be shipped to another location without its cover, the following must be done to avoid damage to the typing unit.
(a) Remove subbase and typing unit from the stand.
(b) Remove the plug button from the forward mounting hole in the bottom of the subbase.
(c) Secure typing unit to the base by inserting and tightening the screw and washer previously stored in the TP181104 cable clip (1.09). Do not damage the typing unit by overtightening the screw.
(d) Store the removed plug button in the TP181104 cable clip.
8. OPTIONAL FEATURES
A. Copyholder
8.01 With the line guide facing forward (Figure 20), insert the rear mounting tabs in the lower mounting slots. Pivot the copyholder to align the front mounting tabs above their mounting slots. Push copyholder downward until the tabs are fully seated.
B. Busy Circuit
8.02 The teletypewriter set is normally wired in a "don't answer" mode of operation for low-paper alarms and out-of-service. In this mode, the set will not answer an incoming call. To wire the teletypewriter set to indicate "busy" instead of not answering, move the black-slate wire from terminal no. 2 to terminal no. 4 on the ringer terminal strip.
C. Hand Receiver
8.03 To install the hand receiver, connect the two white wires to terminals no. 5 and no. 6 on the 9-point terminal board.

33 TELETYPEWRITER SET
REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT OF COMPONENTS
1. GENERAL
1.01 This section provides removal and replacement of components for the 33 Teletypewriter Set. It is reissued to consolidate set information. Marginal arrows have not been used to indicate the change.
1.02 References to left, right, front, rear, etc, consider the set as viewed from the normal operating position.
1.03 The removal procedure givenin this section subdivides the set into its major components, Each removal procedure is written assuming the set to be completely assembled, that is, no components previously removed. If further disassembly of the component is required, refer to the appropriate disassembly and reassembly section or the illustrated parts section which gives detailed arrangements of all parts. Where it will help in determining their location, the numbers of the parts are given in the instructions.
1.04 All tools used to remove the major components referred toin this section can be found in the 570-005-800TC standard tool section.
1.05 Any damaged, worn, or distorted parts Should be replaced if encountered in the removal and replacement procedure.
CAUTION: BEFORE REMOVING COMPONENTS, REMOVE CONNECTORS FROM EXTERNAL RECEPTACLES (POWER SOURCE, DATA SET, ETC).
2. REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT
COVER
2.01 To remove thesetcover (Figure 1), proceed as follows.
(a) Remove paper and paper roll spindle. Remove bezel, if used, on call control unit by removing screws. Remove the volume control knob, if used, or the power switch rotary knob, if used, by pulling frontward. Remove the nameplate by pulling it down and out. Remove the platen knob used on friction feed typing units by pulling it to the left. On sprocket feed typing units, remove a platen knob screw first, then remove the platen knob by pulling it to the left.
(b) Remove the four TP181141 screws from front and the three TP184085 screws from rear of typing unit cover.
Note: On Automatic Send-Receive (ASR) Teletypewriter Sets, remove the TP183112 screw from left rear corner of the tape reader cover.
(c) Gently lift the cover from the subbase and set it aside.
Note: On Automatic Send-Receive (ASR) Teletypewriter Sets, the typing unit cover, tape punch cover, and reader cover are all interconnected and they remove as one unit. If desired the three covers can then be separated from each other.
(d) To replace the cover on sets with low paper alarm switch, first replace the paper and paper roll spindle. Then reverse the procedure used to remove it. Make sure all protrusions are aligned in the holes provided.
TYPING UNIT
(a) Lift typing unit from subbase using the following procedure.
Note: Sets equipped with the keyboard lock modification kit must have the Keyboard removed from the base before the typing unit can 
be disassembled. 

2.02 To remove typing unit (Figure 2), proceed as follows.
(2) Using the screwdriver as a lever, lift the left rear section of the typing unit
(a) Remove cover assembly as described in until the left hand can be placed under the unit.
(b) Remove all plugs which connect the typing unit to the call control unit. Removeground strap from ground tab on call control  unit.
Note: On ASR Sets, remove the two leads that connect to the reader cable from the contact assembly.
(c) Insert screwdriver in slot of TP180977 H-plate and push to left against pressure of spring until plate is disengaged from universal lever. Remove H-plate. (See Figure 2) 
(3) Grasp the extreme right side of the front carriage shaft and lift the typing unit from the subbase.
(e) To replace typing unit, reverse procedure used to remove it. Make sure typing unit is properly seated on rubber isolators and TP180831 answer-back bellcrank is under and aligned with HERE IS key. Replace plugs in proper receptacles oncall control unit. Replace H-plate.
To remove the keyboard (Figure 3), proceed as follows.
Remove cover assembly as described in 2.01.
Remove the keyboard plug from its receptacle on the call control unit.
Move the call control unit aside after removing the four TP121551 mounting screws.
Disengage the keyboard cable from the TP182531 cable clips on subbase.
Insert a screwdriver in slot of TP180977 H-plate and push to left against pressure of spring until H-plate is disengaged from the universal lever.
Remove the H-plate. Loosen the two TP180798 keyboard mounting screws. Slide keyboard assembly toward the rear and lift it from sub-base.
To replace keyboard, reverse procedure used to remove it.

CALL CONTROL UNIT
2.04 To remove the call control unit (Figure 3), proceed as follows.
Remove cover assembly as described in 2.01,
Note: If a speaker is used in conjunction with the call control unit, lift it off the subbase and set it with the call control unit.
Remove all plugs from rear of call control unit.
Remove the four TP121551 mounting screws.
Remove ground strap.
Remove the call control unit.
To replace the call control unit, reverse the procedure used to remove it.

CAUTION: BE SURE THAT THE SPEAKER WIRES DO NOT BECOME ENTANGLED WITH THE BELL RINGER ADJUSTMENT LEVER.

TAPE READER
2.05 To remove the tape reader and attached cable assembly, proceed as follows.
(a) Remove cover assembly as described in 2.01.
(b) Remove tape reader plug marked "6" from receptacle in back of call control unit. Note: On units with automatic reader control, also remove plug marked '5',
(c) Remove plug from power pack.
(d) Remove the two TP182726 push-on terminals from the tabs of the tape reader feed magnet contact assembly.
(e) Remove any necessary cakle clamps.
(f) Remove the four TP121551 call control bracket mounting screws.
(g) Lift call control unit and remove tape reader cable which is located under the call control unit.
(h) Replace call control unit.
Note 1: Early Design Tape Readers: Remove the three TP181244 mounting screws, T P7002 flat washers, and TP124177 lockwashers from tape reader mounting bracket.
Note 2: Late Design Tape Readers: First remove the TP119651 retaining ring from the TP183117 locking screw on tape readers So equipped. Then, remove the TP183117 locking screw from tape reader mounting bracket.

PUNCH
2.06 Early Design (Aluminum Casting): To remove the tape »nunch from the typing unit base casting (Figure 4), proceed as follows.
(a) Remove cover assembly as described in 2.01.
(b) Unhook the TP3864 spring from the TP182894 drive link and rotate drive link out of the way.
(c) Remove the three screws which secure the tape punch base casting to the typing unit base casting in the following order:
First, the TP181246 screw.
Second, the rear TP182891.
Finally, the most forward TP182891 screw.
(4) Remove the TP182805 nut plate from the inside surface of the front wall of the typing unit base casting.
(e) Remove the codebar extensions from their respective codebar slots while removing the tape punch base casting from the carriage shaft.
(f) To replace the tape punch to the typing unit base casting, reverse the procedure used to remove it. Prior to replacing the tape punch to the left side of the typing unit base casting, manually set up the typing unit so that all codebars are in the marking position.
2.07 Late Design (Sheet Steel Frame): To remove the tape punch from the typing unit base casting (Figure 5), proceed as follows.
(a) Remove cover assembly as described in 2.01.
(b) Unhook the spring from the drive link and rotate drive link out of the way.
(c) Remove two bracket connecting screws.
(d) Remove the mounting screw that holds the platen mounting post to the plate.
(e) Remove the codebar extensions from their respective codebar slots while also removing the tape punch from the typing unit.
(f) To replace the tape punch to the typing unit base casting, reverse the procedure used to remove it. Prior to replacing the tape punch to the left side of the typing unit base casting, manually set up the typing unit so that all codebars are in the marking position. Make sure the top surfaces of the mounting brackets are parallel to each other.


TELETYPE CORPORATION SECTION 574-121-100TC
Skokie, Illinois, U.S.A. Issue 4, June 1974

33 KEYBOARD
GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION

3. ASCII
3.01 The 33 keyboard operates according to ASCII. Figure 3 shows the 1968 version of the code used in 33 keyboards. The SHIFT and CONTROL characters, their associated keytop operation lockouts, and parity operation are also illustrated.

4. OUTLINE OF OPERATION
4.01 Transmission of messages is accomplished by an operator selectively depressing the keys and spacebar of the keyboard in the same manner as in typing. The downward movement of each key or the spacebar is translated by a codebar mechanism into a mechanical arrangement corresponding to the code combination representing the character on the keytop. The mechanical arrangements set up the code combinations in a setof keyboard contacts, and, by parallel output, the code combinations are transmitted to a distributor mechanism. A universal mechanism trips a distributor clutch, and a distributor mechanism then translates the parallel output from the keyboard contacts into corresponding start-stop signal for application to the transmission facilities.

5. DETAILED OPERATION
A. Codebar Mechanism
5.01 The codebar mechanism is illustrated in Figure 4.
5.02 For each level in the code there is a codebar mechanism which consists of a front codebar, a rear codebar, a tie link, and two T-levers. Thus in the 33 keyboard there are 8 pairs of codebars whose function is to set up8 pairs of contacts in acoded arrangement representing the key depressed. The codebar mechanism alsocontains a shift mechanism (Figure 8) which consists of a front and rear codebar,a tie link, and two (three in parity keyboards) T-levers. Both the parity and nonparity keyboards contain a control blocking mechanism operated by the CTRL key. It consists of a tie link and two T-levers. The order in which the codebar mechanism is arranged varies, but the following may be considered typical. Thus from front to rear:
Nonparity Keyboard UNIV, 1, SHIFT, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, CTRL UNIV, 1, 8, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, SHIFT, CTRL
Parity Keyboard
5.03 The codebars have slots in their top edges which codes them so they are selectively depressed by the keys' keylevers. Each mechanism has a marking and a spacing position. In the marking position, the front codebar is down, the rear codebar isup, and the right T-lever is in the clockwise position. The spacing position is the opposite: front codebar up, rear codebar down, and right T-lever in counterclockwise position.
5.04 The two codebars in each mechanism are coded so that where one has a slot the other is solid. When a character key is depressed, it is returned to its up position by a leaf spring on the underside of the keyboard. However, the code combination set up in the codebars is retained until another key is depressed. When another key is depressed, only the mechanism whose code elements differ from those of the preceding combination are operated.
5.05 As an example assume that the letter E has been transmitted. The E code combination 1-3---78 remains in the codebar mechanisms. Now assume that the I (1--4--78) key is depressed. Its keylever encounters a slot in the rear codebar of the no. 1, 7, and 8 codebar mechanisms. Thus these mechanisms remain marking. In the case of the no. 2, 5, and 6 codebar mechanisms, the keylever encounters a slot in the front codebar, and they remain spacing. In the case of the no. 3 codebar mechanism, the keylever encounters the solid portion of the rear codebar and shifts it to its spacing position. In a similar manner, the keylever encounters the solid portion of the front codebar of the no. 4 codebar mechanism and shifts it to the marking position. 5.06 Since each code combination is different and is locked in the codebar mechanisms, the complementary coding of the codebars serves as an interlock for the keylevers. When one keylever is depressed, another cannot be depressed because it will be blocked by the solid portion of one or more codebars.

B. Universal Codebar Mechanism
5.07 The universal codebar mechanism is illustrated in Figure 5.
5.08 As a keylever nears the bottom of its travel, it depresses a codebar which is part of the universal codebar mechanism. The codebar, in turn, causes associated T-levers to pivot and a tie link to move to the left. After some free movement, the tie link encounters a tab on a nonrepeat lever and pivots the latter to the left. The tab, in turn, pivots a latchlever which releases a universal lever. Under spring pressure, the universal lever moves up and lifts the nonrepeat lever so that its tab is moved from between the universal tie link and the latchlever. Under spring pressure, the latchlever and nonrepeat lever move back to the right to their unoperated position.
5.09 In its up position, the universal lever locks the right intelligence T-levers in the positions setup by the keylever, permits a contact bail to pivot to its down position and, through a trip linkage, trips the distributor clutch. Near the end of the distributor cycle, the trip linkage moves the universal lever back to its down position where it is latched by the latchlever.
0.10 Should the keylever remain depressed beyond the end of the distributor cycle, when the universal lever moves to its down position, the nonrepeat lever under spring tension moves down until it hangs up on the top of the universal tie link which is still in its left position. When the keylever is finally released, the tie link moves back to the right and permits the nonrepeat lever to move all the way down so that its tab is again between the tie link and the latchlever. The trip mechanism operates in this way to prevent the distributor clutch from being retripped when a keylever is held down.

C. Keyboard Contact Mechanism
o.11 The Keyboard contact mechanism is illustrated in Figure 6.
0.12 The codebar mechanisms set up the code combinations in a set of keyboard contacts. A contact wire is associated with each right T-lever, excluding the universal. In the stop condition of the keyboard, a contact bail is held in its up position by the universal lever. The contact bail holds the contact wires to the right, away from the T-levers.
5.13 When a keylever is depressed, a code combination is setup in the codebar mechanisms. The universal lever moves to its up position and permits the contact bail to pivot under spring tension tc its down position. The contact wires associated with the T-levers that are in the marking (clockwise) position are permitted, under spring tension, to move to the left against a common terminal. Those associated with the T-levers that are in the spacing (counterclockwise) position are held to the right away from the terminal. For example, if the I code combination (1--4--78) is set up in the codebar mechanism, the no. 1, 4, 7, and 8 contact wires are against the common terminal. Similarly the no. 2, 3, 5, and 6 contact wires are away from the common terminal.
Note: When the universal lever isat the peak of its upward travel, it locks the T-levers in their assumed positions (Figure 7). This eliminates the possible loss of a marking or Spacing pulseas aresult of blocking T-levers repositioning during keyboard transmission.
0.14 The distributor mechanism converts these positions to start-stop signals. Near the end of the distributor cycle, the universal lever moves back to its down position and pivots the bail to its up position. The bail in turncams the contact wires back to the right and holds them there in the stop position.

D. Line Break
5.15 When the BREAK key is depressed, it pivots a T-lever which opens the break contact. This action opens the signal line until the BREAK key is released.

E. Repeat
5.16 To repeat the transmission of a character, its keylever is held down along with the REPT keylever. The latter holds the nonrepeat lever down where its tab remains between the tie link and the latchlever (Figure 5). The latchlever is held in its left position and does not latch the universal lever at the end of the cycle. The universal lever thus moves up and trips the distributor clutch causing the character to be retransmitted as long as the REPT key is depressed.

F. HERE IS
0.17 When the HERE IS key is depressed, its keylever pivots linkages in the typing unit which in turn activate the local answer-back.

G. Keyboard — Typing Unit Interface
5.18 The H-plate (Figure 5) serves as the mechanical interface between the keyboard and the typing unit.
5.19 After a key is depressedand the keyboard contacts are positioned, the universal lever moves to its up position. This upward movement is transferred by the H-plate to the distributor clutch linkage, to trip the distributor clutch. Near the end of the distributor cycle the trip linkage, through the H-plate, resets the universal lever back to its lower position.

H. Nonparity Operation
5.20 Figure 9 is a simplified schematic of the signal wiring for the nonparity keyboard.
5.21 Intelligence transmitted from the nonparity keyboard is that of the ASCII system. The keyboard contains two SHIFT keys and one CTRL (Control) key (Figure 8). The control key, utilizing a tie link and T-levers, operates a contact wire in the contact mechanism. The SHIFT key is used to generate the code combinations for printing characters appearing on the upper keytop (eg $ above the 4). The CTRL key is used to generate the codes for the nonprinting control characters appearing on the upper keytops (eg EOT above the D). Simultaneous use of both CTRLand SHIFT keysallows access to special control functions, such as NULL. In every case, the SHIFT and/or CTRL keys must be held down while the appropriate character key is depressed.
5.22 The SHIFT key inverts the no. 5 code element on all 33 keyboards. If the element is normally marking, it makes it spacing; if the element is normally spacing, it makes it marking. It does this by two 2-headed T-levers, one at the shift position, and one at the no. 5 position, each of which operates two contact wires, alternately opening one and closing the other. As shown in Figure 9, in the spacing condition, the "c" contact associated with the no. 0 T-lever is open, and the "d" contact is closed. In its unoperated position, the "a" contact associated with the SHIFT T-lever is-closed, and the "b" contact is open. For example, if the "4" key alone is depressed, the code combination for "4" (--3-56-8) isset upin the keyboard contacts and subsequently transmitted. In this case, the 2-headed no. 5 T-lever holds the "c" contact closed and the "d" contact open, resulting in a marking no. 5 code element. (The signal path is through the stop distributor disc segment, the common terminal, the closed "c" contact, the closed "a" contact, the no. 5 distributor disc segment, the brushes, the inner distributor disc, and the start distributor disc segment, as shown in Figure 9.)
5.23 If the "4" key is depressed with the SHIFT key, the same condition is set up in the keyboard contacts, except that the 2- headed shift T-lever holds the "a" contact open and the "b" contact closed and thus opens the Signal circuit. This results in the no. 5 code element being spacing rather than marking, and the code combination for "$" (--3--6-8) being transmitted.
5.24 If the "N" key alone is depressed, the code combination for "N' (-234--78) is set by the codebars and subsequently transmitted to the line. In this case, the 2-headed no. 5 T-lever holds the "c" contact open and the "d" contact closed. On the other hand, if the "N'™ key is depressed with the SHIFT key, the same condition isset up in the keyboard contacts as before, except that the SHIFT key opens the "a" contact and closes the "b" contact and thus closes the signal circuit. This results in the no. 5 code element being marking rather than spacing and the code combination for A (-2345-78) being transmitted.
5.20 The CTRL key converts the no. 7 code element from marking to spacing. For example, if the "E' key alone is depressed, the "E' code combination (1-3---78) is set up in the keyboard contacts and subsequently transmitted. (The path of the current for the marking no. 7 code element is through the stop distributor disc segment, the common terminal, the closed control contact, the closed no. 7 contact, the no. 7 distributor disc segment, the brushes, the inner distributor disc, and the start distributor disc segment.) If the "E" key is held down with the CTRL key, the same condition as before is set up in the contacts, except that the control T-lever opens the control contact and thus breaks the signal circuit. This results in the no. 7 code element being spacing and the code combination for "ENQ" (1-3----8) being transmitted.
I. Parity Operation
0.26 The parity keyboard facilities are similar to those of the nonparity keyboard. The functional difference between parity and nonparity keyboards is in the control of the 8th level pulse.
0.27 These differences include the adding of a codebar mechanism to generate binary information for the eighth intelligence element. In addition, the SHIFT key operates an expanded shift codebar mechanism (Figure 10) which operates three 2-headed T-levers, two 2-headed T-levers control contact wires at the contact mechanism, and one 2-headed T-lever controls contact wires at an added auxiliary contact mechanism (Figure 10). Also, the CTRL key directly operates a 2-headed T-lever which controls contact wires at the auxiliary contact mechanism.
0.28 Figure 10 illustrates how the CTRL key acts to mechanically block all keys which normally have the no. 6 code element marking. When the CTRL key is depressed, a tab on the keylever engages the rear codebar of the no. 6 codebar mechanism and forces it into its spacing position. Simultaneously, the front codebar moves up, and the solid portions on it block the keylevers of all characters whichnormally have their no. 6 code element marking. This blocking action will prevent false characters from being transmitted.
Note: Keyboard lockout (keylever downward travel blocked by codebar mechanism) may occur if SHIFT or CTRL kKeytops are only partially depressed when the universal codebar mechanism is activated. To clear the lockout, againdepress and release the SHIFT or CTRL keytops and, if necessary, also depress and release the specific primary keytop with which the lockout occurred.
0.29  The SHIFT key inverts the no.5 and no. 8 code elements on the parity keyboard. If either element is normally marking, it makes it spacing; if either element is spacing, it makes it marking. This is accomplished by several 2- headed T-levers — one at the no.95 position, two at the shift position on the contact mechanism, and one at the shift position on the auxiliary contact mechanism. Each 2-headed T-lever operates two contact wires, alternately opening one and closing the other. As shown in Figure 11 in the spacing condition, the "c" contact associated with the no.5 T-leverand the "e" contact associated with the no. 8 T-lever are open, and the 'd" and "f" contacts, respectively, are closed. In their unoperated positions, with the universal lever latched, the "b", "h', and "m" contacts associated withshift T-levers are open, while the "g" and "n" contacts are closed.
Note: The "a" contact is open on early design units equipped with the TP180043 shift marking contact wires and closed on late designunits equipped with the TP186417 marking contact wires.
When the universal lever is tripped and the contact bail is pivoted, the "a" contact will be in the closed condition unless the SHIFT key is depressed, which will open the "a" contact and close the "b" contact. In addition, the "h" and "m" contacts will close and the "gg" and "n" contacts will open. For example, if the "4" key alone is depressed, the code combination for "4" (--3-56-8) is setupin the keyboard contacts and subsequently transmitted. In this case, the 2-headed no. 5 T-lever holds the "c" contact closed and the "d" contact open, resulting in a marking no. 5 code element. The current path is from the connector, through the common terminal, the closed "c" contact, the closed "a" contact and terminal, and back to the connector. Since the no. 8 code element is to be marking, the 2-headed no. 8 T-lever holds the "e" contact closed and the "f" contact open. The current path is from the connector, through a terminal and the "e" contact, through the closed "n" contact and terminal, through the closed "j" contact and terminal, and back to the connector.
Note 1: All contacts except "shift" are shown in the position assumed when T-levers are in their counterclockwise position with universal lever latched.
Note 2: The "a" contact is open on early design units equipped with the TP180043 shift marking contact wires and closed on late design units equipped with the TP186417 marking contact wires.
5.30 If the "4" key is depressed with the SHIFT key, the same condition is set up in the keyboard contacts, except 2-headed T-levers hold the "a", "g", and "n" contacts open and the "pb", 'h", and "m' contacts closed. Thus, the current paths for the no. 5 and no. 8 code elements are open. This results in the no. 5 and no. 8 code elements being spacing rather than marking, and the code combination for $ (--3--6--) is transmitted.
5.31 If the "N" key alone is depressed, the code combination for "N" (-234--7-) is setup by the codebars and subsequently transmitted to the line. In this case, 2-headed T-levers at the no. 5 and no. 8 positions, respectively, hold the "c" and "e" contacts open and the "d" and "f" contacts closed. On the other hand, if the "N" key is depressed with the SHIFT key, the same condition is Setup in the keyboard contacts as before, except that T-levers associated with the shift position open the "a", "g", and "n" contacts and close the "pb", "h", and "m" contacts. Thus current paths for the no. 5 and no. 8 codeelements are closed. This results in the no. 5 and no. 8 code elements being marking rather than spacing, and the code combination for A (-2345-78) is transmitted.
5.32 The CTRL key converts the no. 7 code elements from marking to spacing and inverts the no. 8 code element. When the CTRL key is operated, the no. 7 code element will always be spacing. Also, the no. 8 code element will be made spacing if it is normally marking; it will be made marking if it is normally spacing. For example, if the "D" key alone is depressed, the code combination (--3---7-) is set up in the keyboard contacts and subsequently transmitted. The current path for the marking no. 7 code element is from the connector, through the terminal and the closed no. 7 contact, through the closed "j'? contact and terminal, and to the connector. Since the no. 8 code element is to be spacing, the 2-headed no. 8 T-lever holds the "e" contact open and the "f" contact closed, and there is no current path. If the "D" key is held down with the CTRL key, the same condition as before is setup in the contacts, except the 2-headed control T-lever opens the "j" contact and closes the "k' contact. This breaks the current path through the no. 7 contact, but closes the path through the "f" contact of the 2-headed no. 8 T-lever. The current path for the no. 8 code element is from the connector, through the terminal and closed "f" contact, through the closed "g" contact and terminal, through the closed "k" contact and terminal, and to the connector. This operation results in the no. 7 code element spacing and the no. 8 code element being marking. Thus, the code combination for "KOT" (--3----8) is transmitted.

6.01
6. KEYBOARDS
ALPHANUMERIC KEYBOARD
A typical alphanumeric keyboard arrangement is shown in Figure 12. Keyboards are shipped from the factory with even parity installed. The customer may:
(a) Retain even parity, or
(b) Wire the keyboard for the 8th bit always marking, or
(c) Wire the keyboard for the 8th bit always spacing.
6.02 These wiring options are implemented by connecting wires to terminals at the right front of the keyboard, and at the left contact block. The options and the corresponding wiring are shown in Wiring Diagram 9334WD.

NUMERIC KEYBOARD
6.03 The numeric keyboard is shown in Figure 13. Like the alphanumeric keyboard, the numeric keyboard utilizes the eight level ASCII at 100 words per minute. In some applications the numeric keyboard, when used as part of an ASR set, is used for off-line tape perforations of basically numeric information, for use in later transmission.
6.04 Numerics transmitted are 0 through 9; nonprint functions utilized are EOT, SPACE, RUBOUT, RETURN, and LINE FEED. A repeat key is also located on the keyboard. The HERE IS keylever hole has been plugged for optional field installation. On some numeric keyboards, there is a plugged keylever hole for optional installation of the FORM-FEED keylever, and the codebars are coded for FORM-FEED. Depending on the keyboard, it contains FS, GS, RS, and US keys or variations of these keys.
6.05 The operation of the numeric keyboard is similar to the alphanumeric keyboard as described in Part 5.


TELETYPE CORPORATION
Skokie, Illinois, U.S.A.

33 KEYBOARD
LUBRICATION
1. GENERAL
1.01 This section provides lubrication requirements for the 33 keyboard. It is reissued to add new lubrication interval requirements for the keyboard. Marginal arrows indicate changes and additions.
1.02 The general lubrication areas are illustrated by photographs. The specific a points to receive lubricant are indicated on line drawings with appropriate textual instructions. The line drawings and textual instructions follow a photograph and are keyed to the photograph by paragraph numbers.
1.03 Thoroughly lubricate the keyboard, but avoid overlubrication that might permit the lubricant to drip or be thrown onto adjacent parts.
1.04 should be completed just prior to placing it into service. The lubrication intervals percent when usage is 6 days per week and 30 percent when usage is 7 days per week. Note 2: Sets operating at speeds between 60 and 100 wpm use lubrication requirements for the lower of the two speeds.
Note 3: The lubrication intervals are for the set as a whole — all components of the set should be lubricated.
Note 4: Just prior to storage all equipment should be thoroughly lubricated.
1.05 The textual instructions that accompany each line drawing consist of abbreviated directions, specific lubrication points, and parts affected. The meanings of the abbreviated directions (symbols) are given below:
Symbol Meaning
D Keep dry — no lubricant permitted.
O Oil (KS7470).
G Apply thin coat of grease (KS7471).
1.06 References to left, right, front, or rear, etc, consider the keyboard to be viewed from a position where the spacebar faces up and the contact mechanism is located to the viewer's right.

PARTS WITH PROTECTIVE-DECORATIVE FINISHES. NORMALLY, A SOFT, DRY CLOTH SHOULD BE USED TO REMOVE DUST, OIL, GREASE, OR OTHERWISE CLEAN PARTS OR SUBASSEMBLIES. IF NECESSARY, A SOFT CLOTH DAMPENED WITH SOAP OR MILD DETERGENT MAY BE USED. RINSE WITH A SOFT, DAMP CLOTH AND BUFF WITH A SOFT, DRY CLOTH.
1.07 Materials needed for lubrication are listed in Section 570-005-800TC.
1.08 Disassembly and reassembly instructions are given in Section 574-121-702TC.
CAUTION: REMOVE ALL ELECTRICAL POWER FROM UNIT BEFORE LUBRICATION OR DISASSEMBLY.

TELETYPE CORPORATION
Skokie, Illinois, U.S.A.
SECTION 574-121-702TC
Issue 4, June 1974

33 KEYBOARD
DISASSEMBLY AND REASSEMBLY

1, GENERAL
1.01 This section provides disassembly and reassembly for the 33 keyboard. It is reissued to make a few minorcorrections. Marginal arrows are used to indicate the changes.
1.02 References to left, right, front, rear, etc, consider the keyboard to be viewed from a position where the spacebar faces up and the contact mechanism is located to the viewer's right.
1.03 Disassembly, as outlined in this section, covers the procedure for removing the principle subassemblies which make up the unit. If further disassembly is required, refer to the appropriate illustrated parts section which shows detailed arrangements of parts. Where it will help in determining their location, the numbers of the parts are given in the instructions.
CAUTION: BEFORE BEGINNING DISASSEMBLY, REMOVE CONNECTORS FROM EXTERNAL RECEPTACLES (POWER SOURCE, DATA SET, ETC).
1.04 When self-tapping screws are used to mount mechanisms onto castings, do not remove the self-tapping screws. Merely loosen them enough to remove the mechanisms unless specifically instructed otherwise.
1.05 Retaining rings are made of spring steel and have a tendency to release suddenly. To avoid loss of these rings when removing them, proceed as follows:
(a) Hold retaining ring to prevent its rotating.
(b) Place blade of screwdriver in one of ring's slots and rotate screwdriver to increase diameter.
(c) Ring willcome off easily infingers without flying.
1.06 All toolsused to remove the mechanisms referred to in this section can be found in the 970-005-800TC standard tool section.
1.07 All damaged, worn, or distorted parts should be replaced if encountered in the disassembly and reassembly procedures.
2. DISASSEMBLY AND REASSEMBLY
Note: For informationconcerning the proper procedure to remove the keyboard assemblies from the set, refer to appropriate disassembly and reassembly set section.
KEYBOARD COVER
2.01 To remove the keyboard cover (Figure 2), proceed as follows.
(a) Remove TP119652 retaining ring from the left side of the keyboard cover, and rotate the left side bracket and contact guard away from the unit. expectedly from its assembled position, due to the spring load of two compression springs. If this happens, certain parts may prematurely fall off. To prevent this, always keep the right side bracket firmly against the two compression springs of the keyboard contact mechanism, i e, either hold the right side bracket in place by hand or place it firmly against a fixed vertical surface.
(b) Hold the right side bracket firmly in place against the two TP180331 compression springs of keyboard contact mechanism, and remove the TP119652 retaining ring from the right side of the keyboard cover. (d) To replace the keyboard cover, reverse the procedure used to remove it.

KEYLEVER
(a) Continue to hold the right side bracket 2.02 To remove any keylever (Figure 1), firmly in place, and disengage the keyproceed as follows. board cover from the right side bracket by moving it up and to the left. Lift the keyboard cover off the keys (a) Depress the front end of the TP182240 (early design) or TP185766 universal lever, or the TP186253 (late design) universal lever.
(b) Depress keylever and disengage it from front or rear guide slot.
(c) Lift keylever out of keyboard frame.
(d) To replace any keylever, reverse procedure used to remove it.
Note: Certain levers have compression springs on their lower stems. Make sure that the springs are properly replaced during reassembly.
Note: Contact guard removed.

SPACEBAR MECHANISM
2.03 To remove spacebar mechanism (Figure 1), proceed as follows.
(a) Remove the TP180057 spacebar with the attached TP180054 keylever.
(b) Bow the TP180056 space lever and disengage it from the two TP180055 space keylevers.
(c) Disengage space keylevers from guide AUXILIARY CONTACT MECHANISM slots and remove them from frame.
2.07  To remove the T-lever shafts (Figure 1),
(a) Disengage the TP84575 universal link spring.
(b) Remove corresponding side bracket; spread the frame and lift out.
(c) To replace codebars, reverse procedure proceed as follows. used to remove them.

KEYBOARD CONTACT MECHANISM
2.05 To remove keyboard contact mechanism (Figure 1), proceed as follows. Note: If it is desired to remove T-levers, remove the TP119653 retaining rings and TP186437 nonrepeat lever spring and the TP82442 (early design) or TP186435 universal lever spring. 
(a) Disengage the TP185798 (early design) or slide levers off their shafts.
(b) Remove the right side bracket by snapping if off the frame.
(c) Remove the contact mechanism.
(c) To replace the T-lever shafts, reverse the procedure used to remove it.
Note: Careful attention should be given to the position of the TP180031 compression springs so that they may be properly re
3.01 Remove TP119648 retaining ring. placed during reassembly. Remove TP186834 lever from post. Remove TP86079 felt washer.


TELETYPE CORPORATION Skokie, Illinois, U.S.A.
33 TYPING UNIT
GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION

1. GENERAL
1.01 This section provides a general description and the principles of operation for the 33 typing unit. It is reissued to make a few minor corrections, to add a description of the automatic carriage return-line feed for sprocket feed typing units, and to add description of two print nonprint mechanisms. Marginal arrows indicate the changes and additions.
1.02 References to left, right, front, or rear consider the typing unit as viewed by the operator.
1.03 In the illustrations fixed pivots are solid black, and floating pivots — those mounted on parts that move, are crosshatched.
1.04 The 33 typing unit is an electromechanical receiving device which prints graphics on a paper copy according to a code, and performs nonprinting functions.

2. DESCRIPTION
TECHNICAL DATA
Note: This equipment is intended to be operated in a room environment within the temperature range of 40°F to 110°F. Serious damage to it could result if this range is exceeded. In thisconnection, particular caution should be exercised in using acoustical or other enclosures. )

3. TELETYPEWRITER SIGNALING CODE
3.01 The 33 Teletypewriter transmits and receives messages in the form of a start-stop signaling code. In this code each character or function is represented by current and no current time intervals. Current flowing in the Signal line is referred to as marking; no current flowing in the signal line is referred to as spacing.
3.02 To represent a character or a function eleven pulses are used. The first pulse, which is always spacing, is the start pulse. The next eight pulses are the intelligence pulses. The tenth and eleventh pulses, which are always marking, are the stop pulses. The start and stop pulses are used to synchronize sending and receiving equipment.
3.03 The code used by the 33 typing unit is known as ASCII (American National Standard Code for Information Interchange) and is illustrated in Figure 2. Since it has eight intelligence pulses and three synchronizing pulses it is an 8-level code with an 11-unit transmission pattern.
Start pulse 1 unit of time
Intelligence pulses 8 units of time
Stop pulses 2 units of time
11-unit code
3.04 The ASCII utilizes only the first seven intelligence pulses, the eighth being used to provide anerror detection feature called "even parity." When "even parity" is not provided, the eighth intelligence pulse is always transmitted as a marking pulse. With seven intelligence pulses available, ASCII can accommodate 2'th or 128 permutations. Of these 64 are assigned to printing characters. The rest are devoted to nonprinting characters, or are unassigned.
3.05 The character arrangement for ASCII is shown in Figure 2. The black circles represent marking pulses, the blank squares Spacing pulses. The main block gives the arrangements of pulses 1 through 5. The four smaller blocks at the right give the arrangements of pulses 6 and 7 for the four rows of characters as indicated by the arrows. When "even parity" is provided, characters and functions which have white backgrounds in the character arrangement illustration have the eighth intelligence pulse spacing — dark backgrounds have the eighth intelligence pulse marking. For keyboard transmission, two SHIFT keys and a CTRL key areused as described in the keyboard section.

4. PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION
OUTLINE OF OPERATION (Figure 3)
Power Distribution
4.01 Operation of the motor switch supplies ac power to the motor. By means of intermediate drive parts the rotary motion of the motor is transferred to a distributor shaft. The distributor shaft drives the main shaft and, by means of a clutch, provides motion for the distributor mechanism.
Transmission
4.02 The distributor receives a parallel output from the keyboard and converts it into a serial start-stop code combination. A selector magnet driver receives the distributor serial output and converts it into a form suitable to operate the selector mechanism. The selector mechanism in turn receives the signal and positions the codebar mechanism.
Function Mechanism
4.03 Controlled by the codebar mechanism, the function mechanism enables the typing unit to perform functions supplementary toprinting. The standard functions are "space," "carriage return," "line feed, 'blank," and "bell."
Spacing Mechanism
4.04 The spacing mechanism positions the carriage so that the characters are properly located horizontally on the paper. It spaces the carriage each time printing occurs and when the "space" code combination is received. The function mechanism suppresses spacing on the receipt of all functions except space." At the receipt of "carriage return" code combination, the function mechanism causes the spacing mechanism to return the carriage to the left margin, so that a new printing line can be started.
Paper Feed Mechanism — Friction Feed Typing Units
4.05 The paper feed mechanism positions the paper vertically so that the characters are properly located in lines on the paper. At the receipt of the "line feed" code combination, the function mechanism causes the line feed mechanism to raise the paper to the next printing line.
Form-Feed Mechanism — Sprocket Feed Typing Units
4.06 The form-out mechanism positions the form vertically so that the characters are properly located in lines on the form. At the receipt of the "line feed" or "form out" code combination, the main shaft, through a line feed clutch, causes the platen to raise the form to either the next printing line or one form length, depending upon which function ("line feed" or "form out") is used.

DETAILED OPERATION
A. Motor
4.07 The motor used on the 33 typing unit has a run winding and a start winding connected in parallel. (See the appropriate schematic wiring diagram.) The start winding is in series with an electrolytic capacitor and the contacts of a current-sensitive startrelay. The run winding is connected to a run capacitor. When the motor circuit is closed, the initial surge of current energizes the relay coil, closing the relay contacts. The magnetic flux produced by the operating and start windings starts the motor turning. As the rotor accelerates, the current, through the windings, capacitor, and relay decreases. When it drops to a predetermined level, the relay coil opens the contacts and removes the start coil from the circuit. Using the operating coil alone, the motor continues to accelerate until it reaches synchronous speed.
4.08 The rotary motion produced by the motor is transferred through a motor pinion, an intermediate gear pulley, and a motor belt to a distributor gear pulley. The latter drives a main shaft gear and also a distributor clutch, which provides motion for the keyboard and distributor mechanism (Figure 5).

B. Main Shaft
4.09 The main shaft illustrated in Figure 6 receives motion from the motor, and by means of clutches distributes it to drive all the mechanisms in the typing unit except the distributor mechanism. The distributor mechanism is driven by the motor directly as explained in 4.08. In friction feed typing units the main shaft drives three clutches: the selector clutch, the function clutch, and the codebar clutch. In sprocket feed typing units the main shaft drives an additional clutch — the form feed clutch.

C. Clutches
4.10 The clutches used on the 33 typing unit are all metal internal expansion clutches. A clutch is illustrated in Figure 7. This type of clutch functions like brakes. When the clutch is tripped (engaged) two shoes expand against a notched drum. The force of the expanded shoes against the clutch drum is enough to engage the drum. As the drum rotates, the whole clutch and any mechanism attached to it will rotate.
4.11 The clutch drum is attached to and rotates with a shaft. In the stop (or disengaged) position, a trip lever and a latchlever hold the shoe lever, two shoes, a cam disc, and a cam sleeve stationary. When the trip lever moves away from the shoe lever, the shoe lever, under spring tension, moves away from the stop lug on the cam disc. By means of two lugs, the shoe lever expands the shoes until they contact the notched surface of the drum. The drum causes the shoes to rotate. By means of a lug on the cam disc the shoes rotate the disc and the sleeve attached to it. The clutch is now engaged, and the cam sleeve rotates in unison with the shaft.
4.12 When the trip lever moves to its stop position, it is struck by the shoe lever. The camdisc continues to rotate until the latchlever seats in its notch, and the shoe lever and stop lug are pressed together by the trip lever and latchlever. A spring holds the shoes together, away from the drum. The clutch is now disengaged.
D. Signal Reception
4.13 The signal received by the typing unit may originate either remotely or locally. Locally the signal may originate either in the keyboard or the tape reader. In either case, the incoming signal is received as a parallel output to the distributor. The distributor changes the parallel signal into a serial start-stop output to the selector magnet driver for current rectification. The signal goes from the selector magnet driver to the selector. The following paragraphs will consider the signal as originating in the keyboard. Refer to Section §74-121-100TC for the description of keyboard operation.

E. Distributor Mechanism
4.14 The distributor mechanism is illustrated in Figures 8 and 9. When a keytop is depressed, the corresponding code combination is set up in the keyboard contacts. Simultaneously the universal lever moves up. An H-plate connects the universal lever of the keyboard to the distributor clutch trip linkage in the typing unit. As the universal lever moves up, the H-plate pivots the distributor trip linkage. The distributor trip linkage is connected to the clutch trip lever. As the linkage moves rearward the trip lever is moved away from the shoe lever and the distributor clutch engages.
4.15 The clutch disc is attached to the distributor shaft. A brush holder mounted at the end of the distributor shaft rotates two carbon brushes over the segments of the distributor disc. A spring fastened to the brush holder serves twopurposes: it holds the carbon brushes firmly against the segments, and serves to close the current loop between the outer and inner rings of the distributor disc.
4.16 The distributor disc has two rings. The inner ring is solid. The outer ring is broken into ten segments corresponding to the start, stop, and the eight intelligence pulses.
(a) In the stop position, the outer brush rests on the stop segment, and the current flows in the signal circuit which is closed. (The signal path is from one side of the line through the start segment, the inner ring, the brushes, the stop segment, the common terminal, and the break contact to the other side of the line.) Thus a marking condition exists. Assume that the D key is depressed. The (--3---7-) code combination is set up in the keyboard contacts.
(b) The distributor clutch is tripped, and the brush holder begins its revolution. While the brush is on the start segment, the circuit is open, no current flows, and a spacing element is transmitted. While it is on the no. 1 segment, the circuit is again open. Likewise the circuit is open for the no. 2 pulse. On the no. 3 segment the circuit is closed, current flows and a marking element is transmitted. For the nos. 4, 5, and 6 segments the circuit is open, transmitting spacing elements. The circuit closes for the no. 7element and opens for the no. 8. When the brush reaches the stop segment, the distributor clutch is disengaged, and the line again becomes marking.

F. Selector Mechanism
The selector mechanism illustrated in Figures 10 and 13 receives the code combinations from the selector magnet driver and converts them to mechanical arrangements that control the codebar mechanism.
4.18 A magnet coil is wired by two leads to the output of the selector magnet driver. In the stop condition the outpyt of the selector magnet driver is marking. This keeps the coil energized and the armature attracted: to the magnet core. In this attracted position the armature blocks the start lever.
4.19 When a code combination is received the start pulse (spacing) de-energizes the coil, and the armature drops away from the magnet. No longer blocked, the spring biased start lever overtravels the armature, causing two things to happen:
(a) The start cam follower associated with the start lever falls into the indent of the start cam.
(b) As the start cam follower falls into the indent, the trip lever associated with it moves away from the clutch shoe lever, allowing the selector clutch to engage.
4.20 Once engaged the selector clutch makes one complete revolution. The start cam follower remains in the indent of the start cam just enough to trip the clutch. It then comes out of the indent and rides the cam. This keeps the start lever away from the armature which will now be attracted if the incoming pulses are marking and unattracted if the pulses are spacing.
4.21 As the selector clutch rotates, the spacing locklever, the push lever reset bail, the codebar clutch trip follower arm, and eight selector levers ride individual cams under spring tension.
4.22 Early in the codebar cycle the high part of the push lever reset cam pivots the push lever reset bail. In its motion the bail resets all the spring biased push levers selected in the previous cycle. Once reset the push levers can be positioned either marking or spacing as the intelligence pulses are received.
4.23 The selector cam sleeve illustrated in Figure llhas twelve cam surfaces. The cam surfaces are positioned in a staggered fashion so that a sampling sequence can take place. As mentioned in 4.19 and 4.20, the start cam performs its function, and soon after the push lever reset cam is operated. Following these the spacing locklever cam and the eight intelligence cams operate in sequence.
Note: The sampling sequence for the intelligence cams is as follows: no. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. However, the physical arrangement of the cams is: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 6, and 8 as viewed from left to right.
4.24 If the intelligence pulse is spacing it deenergizes the magnet coiland the armature is in the unattracted position. The spacing lock lever moves up, holding the armature in this position during the sampling interval. The selector lever is prevented from moving up into the indent of its cam by the armature, and the push lever remains in its unselected (spacing) position in front of the selector lever (Figure 13).
4.25 If the intelligence pulse is marking the armature is attracted, moving out of the way of the selector lever, blocking the spacing locklever. The selector lever moves up into the indent of its cam, locking the armature in its marking position during the sampling interval. This permits the spring biased push lever to move rearward under the selector lever.
4.26 As the code combination is received, each intelligence pulse is sampled in turn, and the corresponding selector levers and push levers are positioned accordingly. The contours of the selector cams are such that near the end of the cycle they drive the selector levers and selected push levers towards the front of the typing unit to their marking position. In this position their slotted portions are up. The blocking levers associated with the unselected push levers remain in the spacing position in which their slotted portion is down (Figure 13).
4.27 Near the end of the cycle, the trip follower arm is moved rearward by its cam and trips the codebar clutch.
4.28 When the stop pulse (marking) is received at the end of the code combination, the armature moves to its marking position above the start lever, where it prevents the start cam follower from falling into the indent of its cam. In this position the follower holds the trip lever down so that, when the selector clutch completes its cycle, its shoe lever strikes the trip lever, and the clutch is disengaged.
4.29 As an example, assume that the letter D (--3---7-) code combination is received by the typing unit. The start pulse (spacing) trips the selector clutch, which begins its cycle. The stripper bail strips all previously selected push levers from the selector levers. The intelligence pulses are sampled in order, and the no. 3 and no. 7 push levers are selected. Near the end of the cycle the selector clutch cams the no. 3 and no. 7 push levers down, and they pivot the no. 3 and no. 7 blocking levers up to their marking position. The trip cam causes the trip follower arm to trip the codebar clutch. The stop pulse (marking) disengages the selector clutch, and the selector returns to its stop position.

G. Range Finder
4.30 For optimum operation of the typing unit, the selector must sample the code elements at the most favorable time. The range finder illustrated in Figure 14 provides a means of determining this time by establishing a range of operating margins.
4.31 When the range finder knob is loosened, a pointer may be moved along a range scale by a handle. This changes the angular position of the trip levers and latchlevers with respect to the main shaft, and thus changes the position where the selector clutch begins and ends its cycle. The effect of this operation is to change the time in the cycle when the selector samples each code pulse.
4.32 Rotating the pointer counterclockwise from 60, the center of the scale, causes the selector to sample the trailing portion of the pulse. Rotating the pointer clockwise causes the selector to sample the leading edge. To establish the margins of the operating range, the pointer is moved first in one direction, then in the other, until errors in printing occur. The pointer is then set at the center of the range and the knob tightened.

H. Codebar Mechanism
4.33 As mentioned in4.27,near the end of the selector cycle (towards the end of the eighth pulse) the codebar clutch trip cam pivots the codebar clutch trip follower arm. The arm, through a trip shaft, pivots the trip lever out of the way of the shoe lever. The codebar clutch engages and makes one revolution.
4.34 As the codebar clutch rotates, the codebar reset lever follows its camming surface under the pressure of the codebar reset bail spring. The rotary motion of the cam is applied as an oscillating motion to the codebar reset lever. The codebar reset lever in turn applies its motion to the codebar reset bail which oscillates from right to left when viewed from the front of the unit.
4.35 There are ten codebars in the codebar mechanism illustrated in Figure 15. The function of the codebars is to sense the marking and spacing positions of the blocking levers. As the reset bail pivots, the codebars move up and to the left to sense the positions of the blocking levers. If a blocking lever is down (spacing) a projection on the blocking levers comes in contact with a projection on the codebar, keeping it in a down position. The operation of individual codebars will be described in succeeding paragraphs in conjunction with other mechanisms. Function levers positioned under the codebars and stop slides riding the top of the codebars will be described later.
4.36 Early in the codebar cycle a trip cam pivots a follower arm which trips the function clutch. Near the end of the cycle the cam, through the reset lever, pivots the reset bail to the left. This allows the codebars to return to their stop (down and right) position.

I. Function Mechanism
4.37 The function mechanism illustrated in Figure 17 enables the typing unit to perform functions at the receipt of the proper code combinations. Functions are operations supplementary to printing the message, such as carriage return and line feed.
4.38 Early in the codebar cycle a cam pivots the function trip follower arm, which moves the function trip lever out of engagement with its shoe lever. The function clutch engages and makes one complete revolution. The function drive cam, through a follower arm and drive arm, causes the function rocker shaft to rock. The function rocker shaft, through two drive linkages, moves a function drive bail up during the first part of the cycle and down during the middle portion.
4.39 The underside of the codebars are coded by a series of notches and projections. Under the codebars are a number of function levers which pivot on the same shaft as the function drive bail, and are connected to the bail by springs. As the bail moves up, the springs pull the function levers up so they sense the codebars. If alever encounters one or more projections, it is retained in its down position against the tension of its spring. If the slots line up such that an opening is provided for a function lever, the lever moves all the way up to its selected position.
4.40 In most cases, when a function lever moves up to a certain level, it is latched by an associated function pawl. Then, when the function drive bail pulls the lever and latched pawl down during the middle portion of the cycle, the pawl provides the motion to effect the function.
4.41 Near the beginning of the function cycle, a cam pivots a drive arm which moves the function stripper bail frontward. Near the end of the cycle the cam permits the drive arm, under spring tension, to move the stripper bail rearward and strip any latched function pawls from their selected function levers.
4.42 The operation of the individual function levers and pawls is covered under the individual functions.

J. Printing
General
4.43 The printing of characters on paper is accomplished by the print carriage shown in Figure 18.
Typewheel
4.44 The characters used in printing are embossed on the cylindrical surface of a typewheel. A typewheel character arrangement is shown in Figure 19, in which the cylindrical surface is rolled out flat. The characters are arranged in 16 vertical rows of 4 characters each. For the sake of explanation, the typewheel is divided into clockwise and counterclockwise fields to indicate in which direction the typewheel is rotated to select the rows. The rows are then numbered 1 through 8 in each direction from the borderline between the fields. The characters in each row are designated the "Ist" through the "4th" from top to bottom.
4.45 Again for the sake of explanation, a the latter part of the function cycle, the type printing area is indicated in Figure 19. This is the area the selected character must be in if it is to be printed when the print hammer strikes the typewheel against the platen. shown in Figure 19 the borderline between the fields is under the printing area when the typing unit is in the stop condition. During the first part of each function cycle, vertical and rotary positioning mechanisms impart separate but simultaneous motions to the typewheel to select the proper character. rotates it either clockwise or counterclockwise to align the proper row with the printing area. The vertical mechanism raises it to place the proper character in the printing area. During The rotary mechanism wheel is returned to its stop position.
Power
4.46 As the function clutch rotates (4.36) an eccentric cam imparts oscillating motion through a carriage drive link to the carriage drive bail (Figure 5). The bail pivots rearward during the first part of the cycle and frontward to its stop position during the latter part. In doing so, it causes a power bail on the carriage to pivot first clockwise (as viewed from the left), then counterclockwise (Figure 19). The power bail has two rollers that move along the drive bail and permit it to receive the motion regardless of the carriage position along the printing line.
Rotary Positioning
4.47 The rotary positioning mechanism is illustrated in Figure 20. The direction in which the typewheel rotates from the stop position is determined by the no. 4 codebar. If the no. 4 codebar is marking the typewheel rotates counterclockwise. If it is spacing the typewheel rotates clockwise.
4.48 When a code combination is received in which the no. 4 intelligence pulse is marking, the no. 4 codebar moves up and to the left. A slide mounted on the codebar, through a linkage, pivots the rotary drive arm down. The rotary drive arm has alternate tabs at the end. With the no. 4 codebar marking and the arm pivoted down, the upper left tab engages the left rotary rack. If the no. 4 intelligence pulse is spacing, the no. 4 codebar is down, the rotary drive arm is pivoted up, and the lower right tab engages the right rack.
4.49 A rotary drive bail is held against the power bail by a spring. As these bails rock clockwise (as viewed from the left) during the first part of the function cycle, the drive arm, which is attached to the rotary drive bail, moves toward the front. If the rotary drive arm is down (marking), it pulls the left rack with it, causing a rotary pinion,a cage,a spider, a shaft, and the typewheel to rotate counter-clockwise (as viewed from the top). If the rotary drive arm is up (spacing), it pulls the right rack, rotating the pinion, cage, spider, shaft, and typewheel clockwise. As the power bail and rotarydrive bail rock back to their stop position during the latter part of the function cycle, two reset blocks on the drive bail return the racks and the typewheel to their stop position.
Degree of Rotation
4.50 How far the typewheel rotates in either direction is determined by the no. 1, no. 2, and nc. 3 codebars.
4.51 The no. 1 codebar controls the position of the shift slide. The no. 2 and no. 3 codebars control the positions of the no. 2, no. 3, and common stop slides. These stop slides ride the codebars and are up when the codebars are marking and down when the codebars are spacing (Figure 21).
4.52 The function of the stop slides is to stop either rack in its rearward travel. When a rack is stopped, the rotary drive bail stops, and the continuing motion of the power bail is dissipated by the spring.
4.53 The position of each stop slide determines how much the rack will travel before it is stopped. When a stop slide is down, it blocks the rack; when it is up, the rack will pass through a slot in the slide and continue to travel until blocked by another slide. The shift slide has no slot. It will block the rack whether it is up or down (Figure 21).
4.54 Depending on the position of the shift slide, the rack will travel to position either the odd or even rows of the typewheel. When the shift slide is up, the even rows are selected; when it is down the odd rows are selected. As mentioned in 4.51, the shift slide is controlled by the no. 1 codebar.
4.55 When the no. 1 pulse is spacing, the no. 1 codebar and thus the shift slide are down. In this position the shift slide is blocked by the front stop surface of the rotary stop plate (Figure 22). The no. 2, no. 3, and common stop slides remain locked in the slots of the slide guideplate. The corresponding positions of the shift slide, the no. 2, no. 3, and common stop slide will effect 7, 5, 3, and 1 rows of typewheel rotation respectively.
4.56 When the no. 1 pulse is marking, the no. 1 codebar and thus the shift slide are up. In this position the shift slide is up, blocked by the rear stop surface of the rotary stop plate (Figure 22). The two slide guideplates, under spring tension, move to the rear. This positions all four stop slides to the rear enough to reflect one additional row of typewheel rotation. Thus the shift slide, the no. 2, no. 3, and common stop slides will effect 8, 6, 4,and 2 rows of typewheel rotation respectively.
(b) Counterclockwise Field — No. 4 Pulse Marking
The marking and spacing conditions of the stop slides are the same as for the clockwise field.
Vertical Positioning
4.58 The vertical positioning mechanism illustrated in Figure 23 positions the typewheel so that the proper character in the selected row is in the printing area at the time of printing.
4.59 Vertical positioning is determined by the no.5 and no.7 codebars with their associated no. 5, no. 7, and common stop arms.
4.60 A vertical drive bail is held against the power bail by a spring. When these bails rock clockwise (as viewed from the left) during the first part of the function cycle, the vertical drive bail, through a drive arm, lifts the spider, typewheel shaft, and typewheel. How far the typewheel is raised is determined by three stop arms that are positioned in response to the no. 5 and no. 7 pulses. When the drive bail encounters an arm, it is stopped and its Spring extends as the power bail continues to pivot. The spider moves up and down the bars of the cage, and thus permits rotary motion to be transferred to the typewheel regardless of its vertical position.
4.61 When a code combination is received in which the no. 5 and no. 7 pulses are spacing, the no. 5 and no. 7 codebars and their respective vertical slides remain down, spacing, and no motion is transferred to the stop arms. As the rear extension of the vertical drive bail rises, it strikes the common stop arm, which is - the longest. This permits the typewheel to be raised to the point where the first character in the selected row is in the printing area at the time of printing.
4.62 When the no. 5 pulse is spacing and the no.7 is marking, the no. 7 codebar moves its vertical slide up. The slide pivots the common and the no. 7 stop arm rearward, out of the way of the drive bail. The bail thus strikes the no. 5 arm (the second longest), and the second character in the selected row is placed in the printing area.
4.63 When the no. 5 pulse is marking and the no. 7 is spacing, the no. 5 slide pivots the no. 5 and common stop arms out of the way. The bail strikes the no. 7 stop arm (the shortest) and the third character is placed in the printing area.
4.64 When both the no. 5 and no. 7 pulses are marking, all three stop arms are pivoted out of the way. The bail moves up until it strikes the shoulder on the common stop arm, and the fourth character is placed in the printing area.
4.65 After the typewheel has been positioned during the first half of the function cycle, the printing mechanism illustrated in Figure 24 supplies the impact which drives 'the selected character against the ribbon and paper. Provisions are included whereby printing is suppressed during functions.
4.66 As the power bail rocks during the first part of the function cycle, it imparts through a link clockwise motion (as viewed from the right) to a print bail. This bail, through a link and pivot shaft, pivots two reset arms. Midway in the cycle, the right arm moves a print trip lever out of engagement with a shoulder on the print hammer bail. A torsion spring snaps the hammer bail rearward, and the hammer drives the typewheel and ribbon against the paper. The lower end of the typewheel shaft pivots on the vertical drive arm and permits the wheel to be driven rearward. The hammer bail has asoft head which strikes the typewheel without damage.
4.67 During the last half of the cycle, the power bail returns the printing parts to their stop positions, and a print reset arm attached to the print bail returns the print hammer bail to its stop position, where it is latched by the print trip lever.

K. Printing Suppressed
4.68 The print suppression mechanism (Figure 25) suppresses printing whenever a function code combination is received.
4.69 As the other codebars rise early in the codebar cycle, aprint suppression codebar is held down by a print suppression latch. Early in the function cycle, after any of the function levers have been selected, the latch is pivoted away from the codebar by a print suppression cam on the function clutch.
4.70 If no function lever has been selected, the print suppression codebar moves up and to the left to its selected position. A print suppression slide follows the motion of this codebar and pivots a print suppression latchlever out of the way of the shoulder on the print hammer bail. Thus, when the print trip lever releases the bail, its hammer is permitted to strike the typewheel and printing occurs.
4.71 If any function lever moves up to its selected position, it engages one of a series of notches in the print suppression codebar. When the latch releases the codebar, the selected function lever prevents it from moving all the way to its selected position. Thus, the print suppression latchlever is not pivoted and catches the shoulder when the hammer bail is released by the trip lever. The hammer does not reach the typewheel, and printing is suppressed.
4.72 As the selected function lever moves down and withdraws from the notch in the print suppression codebar, the latch, which has been returned to its stop position, engages a second latching surface on the codebar. This prevents the codebar from rising when the function lever is withdrawn, thus causing printing to occur before the print hammer is completely reset in its stop position. The print suppression codebar is completely reset with the rest of the codebars at the end of the codebar cycle, and at that time the latch engages the first latching surface.

L. Ribbon Mechanism
4.73 The ribbon mechanism (Figure 26) supplies the ink for printing. As the typing unit operates, the mechanism feeds the ribbon from one spool to the other, and reverses the direction of feed when the spool is nearly depleted.
4.74 As the power bail rocks during the first part of the function cycle, it pivots a ribbon power lever which moves a ribbon drive lever rearward. A feed pawl rides on the drive lever and acts on a ratchet to rotate a ribbon spool. A check pawl drops into the succeeding tooth and detents the ratchet until it is again rotated during the next operation.
4.75 The mechanism continues to rotate one spool until the other is nearly depleted. An eyelet in the ribbon then engages the ribbon reversing arm. As the eyelet is pulled against the arm, the latter moves to a point where a detent spring shifts it to its alternate position, where one of its reversing extensions falls ahead of an extension on the feed pawl. As the pawl moves frontward during the last half of the cycle, it strikes the arm extension and is pivoted to its alternate position against the other ratchet. In doing so, it strikes an extension on the check pawl and pivots it to its alternate position against the other ratchet. The depleted spool is now rotated to take up the ribbon until the other spool is nearly depleted, when reversal again takes place.
4.76 The ribbon guide, which is spring biased upward is mounted so that it will slide up and down on posts. As the print pivot shaft turns during the first half of the cycle, the two pivot arms permit the guide to rise so that it is between the selected character and the paper midway in the cycle. At this time the print hammer drives the typewheel and the ribbon against the paper. During the last half of the cycle, the pivot arms retract the guide and ribbon to their stop position so that the printed characters are visible.

M. Spacing Mechanism pressed and the typing unit overprints. When the "carriage return" function is received, the carriage is returned to the left margin.
Note: With the automatic carriage return - line feed feature, spacing is not suppressed at the end of a line. Also, the typing unit does not overprint at the end of a line. The carriage is returned automatically to the left margin when it reaches a predetermined point.
4.77 The spacing mechanism (Figure 27) positions the carriage so that the printed characters are horizontally in line on the paper. Each time a character is printed, the carriage is positioned one character to the right. Spacing is suppressed on all functions except "space" when spacing occurs and printing is suppressed. At the end of the printed line, spacing is suppressed.
4.78 As the carriage drive bail moves rearward during the first part of the function cycle, a small roller mounted near the left end permits a toggle linkage consisting of a spacing feed pawl and toggle link to buckle rearward under spring tension. The feed pawl moves to the right and engages the next tooth on the ratchet. The ratchet is part of the spacing drum. When the roller moves towards the front during the other fart of the cycle, it unbuckles the toggle linkage, and the pawl is moved to the left and rotates the drum one tooth. This motion is imparted by a pulley at the top of the drum to a spacing belt which is looped around a pulley on the right side of the typing unit. The spacing belt in turn moves the carriage to the right one space against the tension of a large carriage return spring. The carriage is held in this position by a check pawl, which engages the spacing drum ratchet.
4.79 When the "space" code combination is received, the codebars permit the space function lever to move up to its selected position early in the function cycle. This motion is transferred, through a space linkage, to a space lever which moves the print suppression latch out of the way of the toggle linkage. The spacing linkage buckles completely and spacing takes place as described. Printing is suppressed as described in 4.68.

N. Space Suppression Mechanism
4.80 On Functions: On every function except "space," spacing as well as printing must be suppressed (Figure 28). When a character to be printed is received, the print suppression codebar moves up and to the left. In doing so it pivots a space suppression latch so that it is moved to the right, out of the way of the toggle linkage. This permits the linkage to buckle and effect spacing.
4.81 On the other hand, when a function is received, the print suppression codebar remains down and to the right, and does not pivot the space suppression latch. In this position, the space suppression latch engages the toggle linkage and prevents it from buckling all the way, and the feed pawl does not move far enough to engage. the next tooth. Thus the spacing drum is not rotated, and the carriage is not spaced. 
4.82 At End-of-Line: When the carriage reaches the right margin, a clamp on the spacing belt pivots an end-of-line lever counterclockwise. In this position, a latching surface on the spacing toggle link engages the end-of-line lever and prevents the linkage from buckling and effecting spacing. Thus, spacing is suppressed, and the typing unit overprints at the right margin until 'the "carriage return" code combination is received.
Note: With the automatic carriage return - line feed feature, spacing is not suppressed at the end of a line. Also, the typing unit does not overprint at the end of a line. The carriage is returned automatically to the left margin when it reaches a predetermined point.

O. Carriage Return Mechanism
4.83 The carriage return mechanism is illustrated in Figure 29.
4.84 When the "carriage return" code combination is received, the carriage return function lever moves up to its selected position, and engages the carriage return function pawl. As the function bail moves the lever and pawl down during the middle portion of the cycle, an extension on the pawl drives the carriage return actuating lever down also. This motion is transferred by means of linkages to the carriage return lever. In moving frontward the carriage return lever is latched by both the carriage return latchlever and carriage return latch.
4.85 In moving frontward the carriage return lever also disengages the spacing pawl and check pawl from the spacing drum ratchet. The carriage return spring then pulls the carriage back to the left margin. As the carriage nears the left margin, a lobe plate on the carriage strikes the unlatch lever. This unlatches the carriage return lever and the carriage return latch. However the carriage return lever remains engaged by the latchlever and cannot move to the rear to allow the pawls to engage. When a code combination is received in which spacing is not suppressed, the carriage return lever allows the feed and check pawls to again engage the ratchet. This is accomplished by the feed pawl moving to the right and back to unlatch the carriage return arm and latchlever from the carriage return lever. The latter, under spring tension, moves toward the rear of the unit allowing the pawls to engage the ratchet. Late in the function cycle the carriage return function pawl is stripped from its function lever by the stripper bail.
4.86 As the carriage approaches the left margin at relatively high speed, a piston on the carriage enters a dashpot cylinder and compresses the air ahead of it. The air forms a cushion which slows the carriage and then, as it escapes through a small, variable hole at the left end of the cylinder, permits the carriage to be stopped at the left margin without excessive shock.

P. Paper or Form Feeding
4.87 The paper feed mechanism used on friction feed typing units is illustrated in Figure 30.
4.88 The paper feed mechanism vertically positions the paper so that the printed characters are properly located in lines on the paper. It feeds the paper on receipt of the "line feed" code combination. It may be adjusted for either single or double line feed.
4.89 The paper feeds off a roll and is led around a platen that vertically positions it in front of the typewheel. A paper guideplate leads it down around the platen. A pressure roller, which sits in a cutout in the guide, holds the paper against the platen so that it feeds when the platen rotates. A curved wire shaft biases the pressure roller and the guideplate against the paper. The pressure is released by a lever on the right end of the shaft. The paper is held around the front of the platen by a wire guide and is led up out of the typing unit by a deflector guide. It can be manually fed by a knob on the left end of the platen.
4.90 When the "line feed" code combination is received, the codebars permit the line feed function lever to move up to its selected position early in the function cycle. The function lever, in turn, moves up a line feed blocking lever to engage the latching surface of a line feed drive link. As the left drive arm on the function rocker shaft moves down, a line feed arm engages the blocking lever and moves it down. This motion is transferred, through a line feed linkage, to a pawl which engages a ratchet on the left end of the platen. The pawl rotates the platen which feeds the paper up one or two lines depending on how the mechanism is adjusted.
4.91 The feed pawl is guided into the teeth of the platen ratchet by two posts. A check pawl riding on the ratchet at the left side of the platen holds the platen firmly until the platen is again rotated. At the end of the cycle, the function stripper bail contacts a stripper plate and strips the drive link from the blocking lever.

Q. Sprocket Feed Typing Units
4.92 The platen drive mechanism (Figure 32) rotates the platen for vertical positioning so that the printed characters are properly located in lines on the forms. The platen drive mechanism is activated through the form-out and form-feed mechanisms (Figures 31 and 33), and controlled by the form-feed clutch. It feeds forms upon receipt of either the "line feed" or "form out" code combination and may be adjusted for single or double line feed.
4.93 Forms feed from a conveniently located stack of forms. They feed under a paper roll spindle and, if used, a low-paper arm and a paper-out arm. From here, the forms, led by a paper guideplate, engage sprocket pins and advance between the platen and two paper guides until vertically positioned in front of the typewheel. The two paper guides and a wire guide hold the forms to the front of the platen and insure that the forms advance around the platen while moving up and out of the typing unit. As the forms move out of the typing unit, they go over the paper roll spindle, which separates incoming from outgoing forms.
Note: Forms can be manually fed by depressing the center knob and rotating the platen knob located on the left end of the platen.
4.94 Form Feed: When the typing unit receives the "line feed" code combination, the line feed function lever (Figure 31) moves up to engage the line feed function pawl in slot no. 13. The function pawl, by means of a lug, connects with the line feed strip pawl in the adjacent slot on the function casting (slot M). During the function cycle the function pawl engages and pulls down the strip pawl. The strip pawl pivots the line feed lever. An extension on the line feed lever contacts the trip lever extension which pivots the clutch trip lever away from the shoe lever on the form feed clutch. The clutch engages and the typing unit advances the form for single or double line feed by means of the platen drive mechanism.
4.95 Late in the function cycle the strip pawl strikes the tail of the line feed strip lever and moves to the rear. The lug on the strip pawl moves the function pawl to the rear, disengaging it from the function lever. Due to spring tension the line feed lever and its extension return to their front position. The trip lever strikes the clutch shoe lever and the clutch is disengaged.
4.96 The number of lines the form advances depends on how much the clutch rotates before it is disengaged. If the clutch becomes disengaged at the first shoe lever, the form will advance one line; if the clutch becomes disengaged at the second shoe lever, the form will advance two lines; and so on. The amount of clutch rotation depends on how soon the strip pawl comes in contact with the line feed lever. This time will depend upon the distance between the strip pawl and the line feed lever. When the distance is small the clutch will trip and engage sooner, rotating a greater amount before it is disengaged. Double line feed will result. If the distance is greater the clutch will trip and engage later, rotating a smaller amount before it is latched. Single line feed will result.
4.97 Form-Out: When the typing unit receives the "form out' code combination, the form-out function lever (Figure 33) moves up to engage the form out function pawl in slot no. 14. During the function cycle the pawl is pulled down. This action pivots the latchlever assembly which becomes disengaged from the form-out lever. Due to spring tension the form-out lever pivots to the rear. An extension on the form-out lever pivots the trip lever extension which in turn moves the clutch trip lever away from the clutch shoe lever. The form feed lever engages and remains engaged throughout the form-out cycle.
4.98 When engaged the clutch drives the platen drive mechanism which consists of belts, gears, and sprockets. The platen drive mechanism is illustrated in Figure 32.
4.99 As long as the form-out lever stays pulled to the rear by spring tension, the form will advance except as regulated by the control cam of the platen drive mechanism. Whenever the platen rotates, the control cam, being related to the platen by belts and gears, also rotates. The rotating cam, through cam lobes, a reset follower lever, and a reset bail initiates the action to terminate the advance of the platen and thus the form-out cycle.
4.100 When a cam lobe contacts the reset follower lever and rotates it toward the rear, a reset bail also rotates and pivots the form-out lever extension away from the trip lever extension. The trip lever engages a shoe lever and disengages the clutch, terminating formout.
4.101 With the form-out just terminated the reset follower lever remains on the high part of a cam lobe, and the form-out lever is blocked by the reset bail from rotating to its latched position. When a "form feed" code combination is received, however, the control cam rotates and the reset follower lever moves from the high part of the cam lcbe. This causes the reset bail to rotate downward and move away from the form-out lever extension. As a result, the form-out lever is permitted to latch. The typing unit can now receive another "form-out" command.
Note: It is in order to allow the cam lobe to clear the reset follower lever that a "form feed" command is given before another form-out cycle can begin.
4.102 The gearing on the platen drive mechanism varies to accommodate various size forms.
4.103 When the platen drive mechanism advances the form one or two lines during "form feed" the cam lobe rotates an equivalent distance. Then, when "form-out" is received the rest of the form will be advanced with the cam lobe merely rotating until it strikes the reset follower lever.
4.104 The control cam can have three lobes with the result that the form may be advanced one-third the distance for which the gears were installed. For example, if the gears on the platen drive mechanism were designed to advance a form of a certain length, by installing cam lobes, this length can be varied to smaller lengths. 
4.105 When an Automatic Send-Receive Teletypewriter Set receives a "form-out" code combination, the form-out bail (Figure 32) is rotated toward the front by the form-out lever extension. This action causes the interlock contacts of the reader stop contact assembly to be operated with the following results:
(a) A pair of normally closed contacts are opened during the "form-out" function. This stops the tape reader from transmitting and prevents characters "on the fly" from being printed.
(b) A pair of normally open contacts are closed. This keeps the typing unit motor operating in case the typing unit is turned off before the form-out cycle is completed. Thus, synchronization of the forms is maintained.
4.106 The form can be manually advanced any length by pressing the zeroizing button on the platen (Figure 32). This will disengage the platen from the platen drive sprocket and allow it to rotate freely.

R. Margin Bell and End of Line Bell
4.107 Margin Bell: As the carriage moves to the right during printing, the carriage upper rear roller makes contact with and depresses a latch which is secured to a lever mounted on the rear rail. As the latch is depressed, the lever is rotated and moves the automatic carriage return-line feed codebar to the right a short distance, where a notch in the codebar permits the bell function lever to move up to its selected position, where it is latched by its function pawl. During the middle portion of the function cycle, the lever moves the pawl down against the pressure of the latter spring. When the stripper bail strips the pawl late in the function cycle, the pawl moves up and causes a clapper mounted on a wire spring to snap up and ring a gong.
4.108 End of Line Bell: Endof line bell operation proceeds in the same manner as above, except that a projection on the carriage picks up the automatic carriage return-line feed codebar at a predetermined point and moves the codebar to the right a short distance until a notch in the codebar permits the bell function lever to move up to its selected position.
4-109 As described for the end of line bell (4.108), the carriage picks up the automatic carriage return-line feed codebar at a predetermined point and moves it to the right. When the carriage reaches the right margin, a notch in the codebar permits an automatic carriage return-line feed function lever to move up to its selected position, where it is latched by its function pawl. 
4.110 The automatic carriage return-line feed function lever, in turn, moves the line feed blocking lever up to where it is latched by the line feed link. Line feed then occurs as described in 4.87 through 4.91 and 4.94 through 4.96.  
4.111 When the automatic carriage return-line feed function lever and its function pawl are pulled down during the middle portion of the cycle, the pawl encounters an extension on the carriage return function pawl and moves it down. Carriage return then occurs as described in 4.83 through 4.86.
4.112 Automatic carriage return-line feed in 3300 Series Coded Sets' sprocket feed typing units involves the action of the automatic codebar. The automatic codebar has projections on the right which can be removed to vary the line length and return the carriage on the 69th or 72nd character. The automatic codebar also has two slots on the underside, one associated with the automatic carriage return function lever and one towards the right associated with the automatic line feed function lever.
4.113 As the carriage approaches the right margin the carriage strikes the projection of the automatic codebar, moving it to the right. This allows both the automatic carriage return function lever and the automatic line feed function lever to move up. 
4.114 As the automatic carriage return function lever moves up it engages its associated function pawl and carriage return proceeds as described in 4. 84 thru 4.86. As the automatic answer -back drum has 21 rows, ST (start)and 1 through 20. The feed ratchet serves to rotate the drum. The stop cam has tines which can be removed at various points so that the length of the answer-back message can be varied. The character suppression level is used to shunt the first answer-back character from the signal line. By breaking off tines in the various rows at the numbered intelligence levels, the drum may be coded to generate the proper answer-back characters. For example, if the first character of an answer-back message to be transmitted is the letter D code combination (--3---7-), tines at the no. 3 and no. 7 levels should be broken off in the appropriate row where the answer-back message isto start. The second character of the message would be coded into the next succeeding row.
Note 1: All answer-back messages should be preceded by the "carriage return," and "line feed" code combinations.
Note 2: For details on answer-back drum coding refer to the adjustment Section 574-122-700TC.

S. Answer-Back Mechanism
4.115 The answer-back mechanism illustrated in Figures 36, 37, and 38 automatically transmits a predetermined sequence of characters for identification purposes.
4.116 A drum is coded with characters making up the answer-back sequence. When the answer-back mechanism is actuated, it rotates the drum, which sets up the code combinations in a set of answer-back contacts. The distributor converts the positions of the contacts to start-stop signals for transmission. After the answer-back sequence has been transmitted, the answer-back mechanism returns itself to its unoperated condition. For reasons that will be described, provisions are made for shunting the signal line during sensing of the first answer-back character of each cycle; and to prevent the answer-back from being actuated by the local generation of the answer-back call character.
4.117 The answer-back drum illustrated in Figure 35 has 11 levels as follows:
(a) Five numbered levels
(b) Feed ratchet
(c) Stop cam
(d) Character suppression
(e) Three more numbered levels
4.118 Viewing it from the numbered end, the line feed function lever moves up it engages its associated function pawl. As the automatic line feed function pawl moves downward it drives the Automatic Carriage Return-Line Feed (Friction Feed) extension on the line feed strip pawl. An extension on the line feed lever controls the trip lever line feed strip pawl downward by means of the extension which pivots the clutch trip lever away from the shoe lever on the form feed clutch. The downward movement of the line feed strip pawl drives the line feed lever downward, tripping the form feed clutch. The clutch engages and the typing unit advances the form for single or double line feed. Near the end of the function cycle the line feed strip pawl strikes the projection of the line feed strip lever and moves towards the rear. Moving rearward the extension moves the automatic line feed function pawl to the rear which disengages it from its function lever.
4.119 The answer-back mechanism can be actuated in three ways.
(a) Remotely, by the reception of a pre-determined call character.
(b) Locally, by depressing the HERE IS key.
(c) Automatically, by actuating the answer-back trip magnet mechanism from some external equipment, such as a data set.
4.120 Remote Actuation (Figure 36): When the answer-back call character is received by the typing unit, the answer -back function lever moves up to engage its function pawl. As the function lever and pawl are moved down by the function bail, the pawl pivots the answer-back bail. In pivoting, the answer-back bail moves a trip link frontward. The trip link pivots the control lever out of the indentation on the stop cam. The control lever, through the stop bail, moves the trip lever rearward, out of engagement with the shoe lever, allowing the distributor clutch to engage.
4.121 When the distributor clutch begins to rotate, a cam roller moves up and permits the feed lever to pivot rearward against the control lever. The feed pawl attached to the feed lever moves rearward to engage the next tooth on the drum ratchet. Near the end of the function cycle the function pawl is stripped from its function lever by the stripper bail. The control lever, under spring tension, tends. to return to its unoperated position in the indentation of the stop cam. This would terminate the answer-back operation by disengaging the distributor clutch. However, since the feed pawl is engaged with the next tooth on the ratchet, the spring tension on the control lever is not enough to overcome the combined tension of the feed lever spring and the drum detent. Thus the mechanism remains in its operated condition throughout the distributor cycle.
4.122 Near the end of the distributor cycle, the cam roller on the distributor clutch moves the feed lever and feed pawl frontward, and the pawl acts on the ratchet to rotate the drum one tooth. The stop cam on the drum now prevents the control lever and trip lever from returning to their stop position. The distributor clutch thus continues to cycle and rotates the answer-back drum.
4.123 The answer-back contacts are wired in parallel with the keyboard contacts to the segments of the distributor disc. As the drum rotates during the answer-back operation, the contact wires, under spring tension, sense each row of tines. If a tine has been broken off at a given level in a row, the associated wire moves frontward to its marking position against a common terminal. On the other hand, if a tine is present, it holds the wire away from the terminal in its spacing position. As the distributor clutch cycles, the distributor converts the positions of the contacts to sequential start-stop signals for transmission.
4.124 The drum continues to rotate until the next indentation in the stop cam is presented to the control lever. The latter then moves into the indentation and returns the associated parts to their unoperated position. Theshoe lever then strikes the trip lever and disengages the distributor clutch. The mechanism is thus returned to its unoperated condition.
4.125 Local Actuation: When the HERE IS keytop is depressed on the keyboard, it pivots a bellcrank which moves the trip link frontward. The trip link pivots the control lever to its' operated position and the answer-back proceeds as described in remote actuation
4.126 Automatic Actuation: The answer-back mechanism of a distant station may be actuated by completing a connection through the local data set or some other equipment. The trip magnet on the distant station is energized. Being energized it attracts the trip magnet armature which allows the trip lever to move frontward. A tab on the trip lever pivots the control lever out of the indent of the stop cam allowing the clutch to engage. As the clutch rotates the blocking cam also rotates. A blocking follower rides the blocking cam and rotates clockwise. By means of a tab the blocking follower rotates the trip lever which latches against the de-energized armature extension. It remains in this position until the magnet is again energized.
4.127 Since the answer-back, keyboard, and tape reader (where used) contacts are wired in parallel with the distributor disc, the answer-back contacts must all be in their spacing position when the mechanism is unoperated, so that they do not interfere with keyboard or tape reader transmission. Therefore, because the answer-back feed mechanism does not feed the drum until near the end of the first cycle, the first character sensed should be all spacing to prevent garbling of the regular message sent from the keyboard and/or tape reader. However, an all "spacing" character is undesirable in some systems, Therefore, a way is provided for shunting transmission from the signal line during the sensing of the first answer-back character.
4.128 As mentioned, the trip link moves frontward when the answer-back sequence is initiated and remains there until it is terminated. In this position it permits a character suppression contact wire to sense the drum character suppression level. The character suppression contact is wired so that it shunts transmission from the outgoing signal line when it is closed. The tine at the character suppression level of the first character of each answer-back cycle must always be broken off in order to accomplish this. Thus the character suppression contact wire is selected and keeps the line marking until the second character is sensed. The tines are left in the character suppression level in other rows, except fcr certain conditions, such as to correct coding errors and to vary the message length. This allows, in effect, one character delay before the message coded into the answer-back drum is transmitted. At the end of the operation, the trip link again moves rearward and holds the contact wire unselected while the mechanism is unoperated.
4.129 Answer-back Suppression on Transmission: Since the typing unit receives every code combination that it transmits, the sending of the answer-back call character would actuate the local answer-back as well as the one at the distant station. To prevent this, a blocking mechanism prevents the function mechanism from operating in the answer-back area during transmission.
4.130 As the distributor clutch rotates, the blocking cam pivots the blocking follower lever which pulls a blocking link rearward. The link pivots the blocking pawl rearward until it releases a blocking latchlever which, under spring tension, moves up against the function drive bail. When the function drive bail and the blocking latchlever move up during the function cycle, the blocking latchlever cams the blocking pawl further rearward where an extension on the pawl is over an extension on the answer-back function lever. The function lever is thus prevented from moving up far enough to be latched by its pawl and initiate the answer-back sequence.
4.131 During the latter part of the distributor cycle, the blocking cam allows the blocking link to move frontward to its unoperated position. As the function drive bail moves down during the middle portion of the function cycle, it drives the blocking latchlever downward to the point where the blocking pawl is permitted to pivot frontward to its unoperated position. Thus every time a character is initiated locally, the distributor clutch cycles and operates the blocking mechanism which prevents the answer-back function lever from sensing the codebars and initiating the answer-back sequence regardless of what character is processed by the typing unit. On the other hand, when remotely initiated characters are received, the distributor clutch does not cycle, the blocking mechanism is not operated, and the function lever is permitted to sense the codebars and initiate the answer-back sequence upon receipt of the predetermined call-character signal.
4.132 The lengthof the answer-back sequence can be varied either by altering the stop-cam level or the character-suppression level.
(a) Stop Cam: The answer-back mechanism can be coded for either 1-, 2-, or 3-cycle operation by removing the appropriate tine(s) from the stop-cam level. In 1-cycle operation, the stop cam in row "6" is removed.
This coding yields a maximum of 20 rows which are available for coding different characters into the answer-back drum. There are actually 21 rows on the answer-back drum, but only 20 rows can be used for coding since one row is suppressed. The number of rows available for message coding is summarized below for I-, 2-, or 3-cycle operation:
When multiple-cycle operation is employed, the answer-back sequence must be coded in each segment of the answer-back drum so that the same message will be transmitted each time the answer-back mechanism is initiated.
(b) Character Suppression: Quite often, due to message length, messages coded into the answer-back drum do not require the use of every available row for coding. Unneeded rows are eliminated from the message transmission by removing the unneeded character suppression tine(s). The answer-back drum will stop through its complete cycle, but the transmission of the coded characters from the unneeded rows will be shunted from the signal line.
Note: The character-suppression tine in the last row of a cycle should not be removed on 33 typing units used in systems where a response to each answer-back actuation signal must always be obtained. If the tine is removed, the answer-back mechanism will not respond to consecutive answer-back actuation signals. This is due to the operating characteristics of the typing unit which, when the character-suppression tine in the last rowof a cycle is removed, leaves the answer-back blocking panel blocking at the end of the answer-back drum cycle of operation. The answer-back blocking pawl will remain blocking until after another character is received through the selector mechanism. The subsequently received character causes the function mechanism to reset the answer-back blocking pawl to its un-blocking position. After being reset and upon receipt of an answer-back actuation signal, the answer-back mechanism will be triggered. Hence, with the character-suppression tine removed from the last row of an answer-back cycle, typing unit answer-back mechanisms will only respond to every other answer-back actuation signal unless an intervening character is received through the selector mechanism,

5. OPTIONAL FEATURES
PRINT NON PRINT
5.01 The function of the print nonprint mechanism is to block all the function levers from rising (except the print suppression function lever) during the functioncycle. There are two types of print nonprint mechanisms, one magnet operated and one solenoid operated.
A. Magnet Operated
9.02 The magnet operated print nonprint mechanism shown in Figure 39 allows transmission or reception of tape messages without printed page copy. An on and off toggle switch and a red indicator lamp mount to the right of the platen on the call control unit panel. The switch controls a magnet attached to the typing unit casting. The red indicator lamp lights when the mechanism is activated and the typing unit placed in the nonprint mode. Operation of the magnet attracts an armature which pivots a bellcrank. Operation of the belicrank moves a nonprint codebar which blocks all the function levers except a special function lever. This special function lever rises every cycle. In so doing, it blocks the print suppression codebar and thus printing is suppressed. Turning the mechanism off extinguishes the indicator light and the nonprint codebar returns to its unoperated position under spring tension.
B. Solenoid Operated
5.03 The solenoid operated print nonprint mechanism shown in Figure 40 is a remote-controlled device consisting of a bracket which supports a solenoid. At the end of the solenoid plunger is attached a lever which is part of the nonprint codebar. Activation of the solenoid pulls the plunger and thus positions the nonprint codebar, blockingall the function levers except the print suppression function lever. Operation of the print suppression function lever Suppresses printing. At the receipt of the off Signal the nonprint codebar moves to its unoperated position under spring tension.
1.03 Thoroughly lubricate the typing unit, but avoid overlubrication that might permit the lubricant to drip or be thrown onto adjacent parts. Saturate all felt washers and oilers with oil, and apply oil to each end of all bearings.
1.04 Initial lubrication of the typing unit should be completed just prior to placing it into service. The lubrication intervals for the tape punch are similar to the lubrication intervals of the set. The lubrication intervals are dictated by the hours of use (including idle time) on a daily basis. The following charts and notes list the appropriate lubrication intervals.
Note 2: Sets operating at speeds between 60 and 100 wpm use lubrication requirements for the lower of the two speeds.
Note 3: The lubrication intervals are for the set as a whole — all components of the set should be lubricated.
Note 4: Just prior to storage all equipment should be thoroughly lubricated.
Note 5: Model 33 typing units having Serial Numbers 144,000 and above use the lubrication interval described in 1.04. Model 33 typing units having Serial Numbers below 144,000 should reduce the lubrication interval by 1/3 or 33 percent.
1.05 On occasion when the printer is disassembled, apply a coat of thoroughly mixed 50 percent KS7470 oil and 50 percent KS7471 grease at places indicated below.
Selector Cam Surfaces (2.44)
Spacing Gear Teeth (2.23)
Codebar Pivot Shaft (2.17 and 2.18)
Eccentric Cams (2.02 and 2.04)
Stop Bail Adjusting Tab (2.11)
Platen Shaft Bearings — Sprocket Feed Units only (2.49)
Distributor Shaft Cam Roller (Early Design) or Stud (Late Design) (2.13)
H-Lever (2.13)
Note 1: On occasion when the clutch is disassembled, lubricate the Internal Clutch Assemblies (2.02, 2.04, 2.44, and 2.53 on Form Feed Mechanisms only) as follows: Apply a thin coat of KS7471 grease at the loops of the clutch shoe lever spring, and lubricate the internal mechanism of the clutch with KS7470 oil.
Note 2: At regular lubrication intervals lubricate the clutch mechanism with KS7470 oil only.
1.06 The textual instructions that accompany the line drawings consist of abbreviated directions, specific lubrication points, and parts affected. The meanings of the abbreviated directions (symbols) follow:
Symbol Meaning
D Keep dry — no lubricant permitted.
G Apply thin coat of grease (KS7471).
O Oil (KS7470).
1.07 References to left, right, front, or rear, etc, consider the typing unit to be viewed from a position where the carriage area faces up and the selector area is located to the viewer's left.
CAUTION: DO NOT USE ALCOHOL, MINERAL SPIRITS, OR OTHER SOLVENTS TO CLEAN PLASTIC PARTS OR PARTS WITH PROTECTIVE DECORATIVE FINISHES. NORMALLY, A SOFT, DRY CLOTH SHOULD BE USED TO REMOVE DUST, OIL, GREASE, OR OTHERWISE CLEAN PARTS OR SUBASSEMBLIES. IF NECESSARY, A SOFT CLOTH DAMPENED WITH SOAP OR MILD DETERGENT MAY BE USED.
AFTERWARDS, RINSE EACH CLEANED PART OR SUBASSEMBLY WITH SOFT, DAMP CLOTH AND BUFF WITH A SOFT, DRY CLOTH.
CAUTION: ALL ELECTRICAL POWER MUST BE REMOVED FROM UNIT BEFORE LUBRICATING OR REMOVING COMPONENTS FOR LUBRICATION.
1.08 Tools and materials needed for teletypewriter lubrication are listed in Section 570-005-800TC.

2. BASIC UNITS
COMMON MECHANISMS
Note: Remove ribbon mechanism and carriage return spring before lubricating. For instructions, see the appropriate disassembly and reassembly section.


Replace ribbon mechanism and carriage
(Right Side View) return spring.

2.37 Carriage Rear Rail
Note: These lubrication instructions apply only to typing units equipped with a TP181304 latch.

TELETYPE CORPORATION
Skokie, Illinois, U.S.A.
33 CALL CONTROL UNIT
GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND OPERATION

1. GENERAL
1.01 This section provides a general description and operation of the 33 call control units. It is reissued to consolidate 33 information. Marginal arrows are not used to indicate changes.
1.02 This section describes two call control units which may be considered basic units. They are:
(1) Call Control Unit for Switched Network Service
(2) Call Control Unit for Private Wire Service.
1.03 The call control unit is the electrical link which joins the various components of the set to one another, and the set to the transmission facilities.
1.04 References to left, right, front, or rear consider the call control unit as viewed by the operator.
1.05 This equipment is intended to be operated in a room environment within the temperature range of 40° F to 110° F. Serious damage to it could result if this range is exceeded. In this connection, particular caution should be exercised in using acoustical or other enclosures.
2. DESCRIPTION AND OPERATION - CALL CONTROL UNIT FOR SWITCHED NETWORK SERVICE
2.01 The call control unit for Switched Network Service (Figure 1) supplies DC signals to a data set. The data set modulates these signals into tone frequencies which are transmitted over the telephone lines. A data set at the receiving station demodulates the tone frequencies back to dc signals which are then handled by the call control unit for operation of the teletypewriter set. For a better understanding of the call control unit, 2.02 briefly describes the data set.
2.02 Start-stop dc signal pulses form essentially a square wave which cannot readily be transmitted over telephone lines. The data set is basically a converter which changes the de signals from the sending or calling station into frequency-shifted tones for transmission over the telephone network. A marking pulse from a sending station is converted to a 1270-hertz marking signal (F1 mark) and a spacing pulse becomes a 1070-hertz spacing signal (F1 space). The data set at the receiving or called station sends a 2225-hertz marking signal (F2 mark) and a 2025-hertz spacing signal (F2 space). During transmission of a message, the calling station sends a mark and space tones (Fl mark and space) while the called station sends a continuous mark tone (F2 mark). In this way the telephone facilities are operated on a full duplex basis. If the signal received at either station (F1 mark and space at the called station and F2 mark at the calling station) shifts to a space tone for more than one second, or if the received signal is lost for one second, the data set will cause the station to be disconnected. This provides assurance that the connection is maintained for the entire period of message transmission.
2.03 The call control unit used with the data set operates with conventional telephone central offices that have the necessary routing and accounting facilities. In operation, a call is originated by depressing the ORIG pushbutton (Figure 2). A lamp illuminates the pushbutton, and the dial tone will be heard through a loudspeaker. If the line is busy, a busy signal will be heard and the clear (CLR) pushbutton (non-locking) should be depressed. If the line is not busy, the operator dials the number of desired station. This causes the called station to go into connect condition. Manually operated, the called station operator presses the answer (ANS) pushbutton (non-locking). Following a short interval, about 1-1/2 seconds, in which telephone facilities are connected, the called station transmits a mark tone (F2) and receives a mark tone (F1) from the calling station. Receiving the continuous F2 mark tone from the called station for 1 second causes the calling station to go into connect condition, and its motor is turned on. Likewise, the continuous F1 mark tone from the calling station for 1 second causes the called station to go into connect condition, and its motor is turned on. Either station can now transmit.
2.04 At the end of the message, either station may originate a disconnect by depressing the CLR pushbutton, (Figure 2) at which time each station goes back to its idle condition, ready to receive or originate other calls. For keyboard practice, maintenance purposes, or preparation of copy, the local mode (LCL) pushbutton (locking) is depressed. This turns on the motor and disables automatic answering facilities, if present. In the event of an incoming call during local operation, the call control unit responds to ringing signals and the ANS pushbutton must be operated manually. Operation of the test (TST) pushbutton (locking) causes received signals to be retransmitted to the test center for maintenance purposes. A lamp, associated with each pushbutton, illuminates the pushbutton whenever that pushbutton has been operated and the operating condition exists. The ANS lamp is pulsed in response to ringing signals of an incoming call, and lights continuously when the call is answered. The CLR lamp is automatically extinguished 1.5 seconds after the pushbutton has been depressed, and disconnect is completed.
2.05 A steady mark signal blinds the associated teletypewriter during all intervals, except when in the connect condition. This prevents spurious characters from being printed except when due to loss of signals, circuit noise, or deliberate break or space-disconnect signals.
Progress of a Call
2.06 To originate a call, the ORIG pushbutton (Figure 2) is momentarily depressed. This connects the station to the line and lights the ORIG lamp. During the period of time in which connection is being made, the telephone central office makes no time measurements. When the ORIG pushbutton is closed, the call control unit is connected to the telephone line through the data set and an off-hook condition is set up. The amplifier is connected into the circuit so that the dial tone from the central office is heard. The called station is dialed while the amplifier monitors the progress.
2.07 At the called station audible and visible signaling devices are operated. The called station goes off hook and into the connect condition upon operation of the ANS pushbutton circuit, by manua! or automatic means, at the distant point. At this time, there is a nonsignaling interval of 1.225 seconds during which accounting and toll recording facilities at the telephone exchange will be cleared. Following the nonsignaling interval, the called station transmits its F2 mark tone and sets its monitoring timer to respond to the Fl mark tone from the calling station. When the continuous F2 mark tone is received at the calling station for a period of 1 second, indicating that a station has answered, it will go into the connect condition and turn on its motor. When the continuous F1 mark tone is received at the called station for an interval of 1 second, it will go into the connect condition. The station may now acknowledge the call either by operator keyboarding, or by automatic answer-back message transmission. The monitoring timers at both stations are set to respond to reception of a space tone from the distant station. Traffic can now be exchanged from either station on a half-duplex basis.
Disconnecting a Call
2.08 During the time the two stations are connected (traffic interval), either station can initiate a disconnect as follows:
(a) A call is normally terminated by the end-of-transmission (EOT) code combination which provides fast disconnect without introducing hit characters. This is accomplished by the data set in response to EOT contact closures in function boxes of both the sending and receiving teletypewriters.
(b) A call connection can also be cleared manually by momentarily depressing the CLR pushbutton (Figure 2). Operation of the CLR pushbutton at either station will cause transmission of a spacing signal of 1.5-seconds duration, after which the station originating the disconnect will discontinue its tone transmission and go back on hook. The other station, after receiving the spacing signal for 1 second, will automatically transmit its 1.5-second spacing signal and then go on hook. Both stations will then be back in their original idle condition in which calls can be either originated or accepted.
Answering a Call
2.09 To answer a call manually, momentarily depress the ANS pushbutton (Figure 2). This connects the station to the line and lights the ANS lamp. The lamp remains lighted until the answer mode is terminated. Manual answering is necessary only when the automatic answer-back circuit is disabled. The automatic answer-back circuit is disabled by low-paper contacts, data set relay contacts (when in local mode), and the OUT OF SERV. key.
2.10 Call control units equipped with automatic answering facilities will respond to received ringing signals, turning the teletypewriter on at the end of the ringing interval and proceeding through to the connect condition. Automatic message answer-back is a part of this feature. The presence of an operator is required in order to complete disconnect and return the teletypewriter to idle condition. For unattended service, an automatic disconnect timing device (optional) actuated when a call is answered, will cause the teletypewriter to go through the connect condition, send the 1.5-second spacing tone, and go back on hook if the F1 mark tone is not received within 8 seconds after the called station answered. This is designed to prevent the unattended station from being made busy by (telephone) calls that fail to cause a full connection to be set up. This feature does not affect normal automatic disconnect upon receiving the l-second spacing tone or loss of tones due to a dropoff.
Local Mode
2.11 The local mode (LCL) provides off-line operation of the teletypewriter. The operator selects the local mode by depressing the LCL pushbutton (Figure 2). This lights the LCL lamp and operates the motor control relay (MCR) to energize the motor. The data set connects the sending circuit to the receiving circuit and enables the keyboard and answer-back to transmit. In this condition the teletypewriter can be used for preparing copy, for operator practice, or for maintenance purposes. If an incoming signal is received during this time, ringing signals are received and manual operation of the ANS pushbutton is required in order to receive the message. If the teletypewriter is in a terminal hunting group, the operator must turn the out-of-service (OUT-OF-SERV.) knob to the RESTORE position momentarily and then to NORMAL.
OUT OF SERV. Switch
2.12 The OUT OF SERV. switch (Figure 2) prevents the automatic answering of incoming calls. In its NORMAL position (arrow on knob upright), it has no effect or function; in the OUT OF SERV. position (knob rotated counterclockwise and detented) it sets the following conditions:
(a) A contact is closed that causes the OUT OF SERV. lamp to light.
(b) A contact is closed that shorts the ringer coils. This makes the ringer inoperative. As an option the contact can be located to shunt both the ringer and series capacitor (ie, the telephone line). This makes the station appear to be in an off-hook condition or busy to the central office.
(c) A contact is opened that breaks the automatic answer circuit to the answer relay. This prevents the relay from operating in response to the ring-up relay and thus the telety pewriter will not answer.
2.13 For stations that are not in terminal hunting groups, the operator may return the teletypewriter to service by turning the OUT OF SERV. knob to the NORMAL position. For terminal hunting stations, however, the operator must turn the knob to the RESTORE position and hold it until a dial tone is heard. In this position:
(a) A contact is closed that shorts the tip to ring (off-hook condition). This condition is detected by the central office which then releases the teletypewriter from lockout and applies the dial tone.
(b) A contact is closed that completes a path from the speaker amplifier to sround. This permits the amplifier to pass the line signals (dial tone). The OUT OF SERV. switch is then restored to NORMAL.
Low-Paper Alarm
2.14 A low-paper alarm is provided in the teletypewriter. When a low-paper condition occurs, make contacts in the low-paper switch provide ground to the low-paper buzzer, permitting it to operate. Depressing the buzzer-release (BUZ-RLS) pushbutton (locking) in the call control unit (Figure 2) silences the buzzer and causes the BUZ-RLS lamp to light. Attempting to release the pushbutton without replenishing the paper supply will result in the buzzer operating. When the paper has been replenished, the teletypewriter is returned to normal by releasing the BUZ-RLS pushbutton.
2.15 Break contacts on the low-paper switch disable the automatic answer-back circuit. The operator can override this condition by answering manually. If the low-paper alarm occurs during a call, the operator has the option of completing the call before changing the paper, or interrupting the call. To interrupt the call, the operator stops transmission by depressing the keyboard BREAK key, and then depressing the BRK-RLS pushbutton to notify the distant station of the problem. The connection is cleared by simultaneously operating the control (CTRL) and EOT keys on the keyboard. Turning the OUT OF SERV. knob to the detent position insures that the teletypewriter will not automatically answer a call while paper is being replenished.
2.16 To restore the teletypewriter to service after the paper has been inserted, depress the CLR pushbutton and return the OUT OF SERV. knob (Figure 2) to its NORMAL position. (For teletypewriters in terminal hunting groups, turn the knob to its RESTORE position and hold it there. When dial tone is heard, release the knob.) The teletypewriter is now in a normal idle operating position.
Restrain Lamp
2.17 This high intensity restrain (REST) lamp (Figure 2) lights when a restraining signal is received from an 8-level to a 5-level converter used in transmission to 5-level TWX stations on the DDD switching plan. The lamp remains lighted until the restraining signal is removed. The purpose of this feature is to limit the sending speed from §8-level teletypewriter transmitting at 100 wpm to 5b-level teletypewriters receiving at 60 wpm.
Test Mode
2.18 If the TST pushbutton (Figure 2) is operated while the teletypewriter is connected to a test center, the message sent by the test center will be recorded on the teletypewriter and turned around and sent back for analysis. This is accomplished by connecting the teletypewriter to the data set through a set of transfer contacts and a break contact to ground. This type of operation can be terminated by momentarily operating any of the nonlocking pushbuttons which will then release the TST locking pushbutton.
Signal Generation
2.19 The teletypewriter can send by operating the keyboard, answer-back mechanism, or BREAK key (Figure 2). The keyboard signal generator contacts and answer-back contacts are in parallel. with the signal generator (distributor) which is, in turn, connected to the data set. The BREAK key connects to the data set via separate leads.
Dialers.
2.20 Pulsing Rotary Dialer: For rotary dialer applications, a pulsing contact of the rotary dialer is inserted into the telephone line. The rotary dialer (Figure 2) is equipped with a normally closed pulsing contact and a normally opened off-normal contact. The pulsing contact is inserted into the telephone line when the station originates a call. When answering the call, a short circuit is applied across the pulsing contact. The off-normal contact is placed across the output of the amplifier and silences the speaker whenever the dialing disc is moved.
2.21 Pulsing Card Dialer (40A Dialer): The AOA dialer operates on direct current furnished from the central office. To use the card dialer, the ORIG pushbutton is depressed. After a dial tone has been received, a card with the telephone number punched in it is firmly inserted in the slot. This operation winds a spring which later pushes the card out of the slot as dialing proceeds.
2.22 The card dialer is started by momentarily depressing the START bar. This operates the card dialer start contact and establishes a path from the ring side to the tip. side of the telephone line. Sending of the dial pulse means interruptions of the current in the telephone line.
2.23 A scanning drum makes sixteen revolutions: ten for transmitting the digits and six for interdigital time. At the completion of the revolutions, an escapement is tripped which permits the next row of holes on the card to be placed in position for sensing.
2.24 This sequence is repeated at each row as the card advances out of the card dialer. If no "stop" code is punched in the card, the card dialer will continue to advance the card (even if no number code is punched) until the card is released. If the "stop" code is sensed, the card dialer stop contacts operate. The card can be released by operating the RELEASE bar. No attempt should be made to release the card by reoperating the START bar, as this will trigger the card dialer mechanism and place a short circuit across the output of the data set. This shunt will prevent the station from receiving or sending until the card is disengaged. If this condition persists, the data set will disconnect.
2.25 Pulsing Card Dialer (41A Dialer): In locations with 60-hertz ac power, the 41A card dialer is used. In this dialer the power to operate the commutator disc is derived from a synchronous motor powered by the 14 v ac source in the teletypewriter. The power to advance the card in the dialer is derived from a spring wound by inserting the card in the slot. The switching functions and the motor control are independent of the signal path. These features result in a superior performance as compared with the 40A dialer.
2.26 To operate the dialer, the card is inserted and the START bar is momentarily operated. The commutator disc begins rotating, and the dial pulses are sent to the line.
2.27 When all the punched codes are sent, the disc stops. A mechanical linkage then permits the spring, wound by inserting the card, to advance the card for the next digit to be read and dialed. As the "stop" code is read, the dialing stops. The card can then (as also at any other time) be released by operating the RELEASE bar.
2.28 TOUCH-TONE Dialer: For multifrequency (MF) dialing applications, the dialing frequencies generated by the TOUCH-TONE dialer are fed through the loudspeaker amplifier and into the telephone line via the sending amplifier in the data set. As the station connects, the output of the TOUCH-TONE dialer is disconnected from the data set so that there is no hazard connected with improper operation of the TOUCH-TONE dialer at that time.
2.29 The TOUCH-TONE MF signal generated is a one-transistor oscillator generating two frequencies any time a single pushbutton is operated. Seven frequencies are provided, with each dial digit corresponding to two frequencies according to the table below:
TOUCH-TONE
Frequencies
cps —1209 1336 1477
607 1 2 3
770 4 5 6 Dial
851 7 8 9 Digits
941  10 
2.30 The frequencies above 1000 hertz are generated at a somewhat higher level to compensate for greater line loss at those frequencies. There is also a variation or amplitude for various digits.
2.31 TOUCH-TONE and Card Dialer (Figure 2): To use the automatic card dialer, the ORIG pushbutton is depressed. After the dial tone has been received, a punched card is inserted into the slot and pushed down. The START bar is then momentarily operated. The card dialer proceeds with dialing under power of a spring motor wound by insertion of the card. When a "stop" code is read, the dialing stops. The card should then be released by reoperating the START bar.
2.32 The sensing contacts in the card dialer are in parallel with the frequency-determining contacts in the associated TOUCH-TONE dialer. As the card advances out of the slot, the sensing contacts sense the holes punched in the card and thus determine the proper frequencies to be transmitted. This occurs for every row on the card.
2.33 Since the card advances out of the slot very rapidly, there is no need for a separate RELEASE bar. When the station connects, relay contacts in the data set disconnect the MF signal input and remove any hazard connected with false operation of the TOUCH-TONE dialer.
Fuse Protection
2.34 Three fuses protect the components in the call control unit from accidental shorts or overloads. They are the selector magnet driver fuse, the motor delay timer fuse, and the ac line fuse.
Electrical Interconnections
2.35 A number of nylon plugs and a terminal strip located at the rear serve to interconnect the set components to the call control unit. A six foot power cord connects the call control unit to the ac power source.
Circuits
2.36 Selector Magnet Driver Circuits: The data set supplies a 20-mA dc signal to the selector magnet driver associated with the teletypewriter. The selector magnet driver amplifies the signal to 500 mA to operate the selector on the teletypewriter. The selector magnet driver is a two-stage triggering regenerative amplifier (or flip-flop) capable of switching high output currents of 0.500 ampere at very closely controlled input current levels. The output of the selector magnet driver is automatically regulated and is essentially independent of normal variations in power supply voltage, and of selector-magnet and current-limiting resistance values.
2.37 Speaker Amplifier Circuit: The speaker amplifier is powered only after the ORIG key is operated and is quieted when the station connects. It has two inputs, one from the telephone line via the buffer amplifier in the data set limiter and the other from the multifrequency (MF) tone dialer. Three outputs are provided: (1) into the speaker or optional hand-held receiver, (2) into the telephone line through the sending amplifier in the data set, and (3) an auxiliary output into the data set. The line-to-speaker connection permits monitoring of supervisory signals when originating a call. The TOUCH-TONE dial-to-line and TOUCH-TONE dial-to-speaker connection provides for amplification of the outgoing MF dialing signals and for monitoring them during outpulsing. The line-to-second-output connection is provided for the dial tone detector (when furnished). The various connections mentioned are established by switching in the data set and by the common switch in the TOUCH-TONE dialer.
2.38 Technical Data
Dimensions (Approximate)
Width ............ 5 inches
Length ............ 17 inches
Height ............ 6 inches
Input ........ 115 v ae + 10%, 60 Hz
Environmental conditions .... 40°F to 110° F ambient temperature
2.39 Power for the motor, selector magnet driver, local power supply, and tape reader power pack, is supplied from fused 115 volt ac, 50 to 60 hertz power. Direct current of either 0.020 or 0.060 ampere is required for the signal line(s) and for operation in the local mode. The dc power for the signal line(s) is supplied by external facilities, while local dc current for operation in the local mode is furnished through the operation of the local power supply circuit in the call control unit. At the rear of the call control unit is a terminal strip which provides the point of entry for the ac power and signal line(s) into the teletypewriter set.
Note: Normally the tape reader power pack comes from the factory installed in the call control unit; optionally the power pack may be mounted in the stand. See Section 574-100-201TC.
2.40 A 3-position rotary power switch is the only manual control on the call control unit. Its three positions are: OFF, LOCAL, and LINE.
Fuse Protection
2.41 Two fuses protect the components in the call control unit from accidental shorts and overloads. They are the selector magnet driver fuse and the ac power line fuse.
Electrical Interconnections
2.42 Connector plugs at the rear of the call control unit serve to interconnect the set components to the call control unit. A terminal strip, also located at the rear, serves to connect the ac power to the call control unit and offers a convenient terminating area for other accessories and external connections.
Line Mode
2.43 When the switch is in the LINE position, the teletypewriter is placed in the external signal line loop for communication with other teletypewriters. The external signal line loop is united with the selector magnet driver. With dc power on the signal lines, transmission from the keyboard or tape reader will cause the typing distributor to send start-stop signals to other teletypewriters in the external signal loop. Also, the local teletypewriter is able to receive, through the typing unit selector, the start-stop signals transmitted from other teletypewriters in the signal line loop.
Local Mode
9.44 When the switch is in the LOCAL position, (1) the local battery is supplied to the selector magnet driver and the send circuit, (2) the external signal line loop is divorced from the selector magnet driver, and (3) the external signal line loop is shunted so that other teletypewriters in that loop can communicate without being affected by the operation of the local teletypewriter.
Off Mode
2.45 When the switch is in the OFF position, the signal line is diverted around the local teletypewriter. Other teletypewriters can communicate in the signal loop without interference. All power in the call control unit, except the ac power to the selector magnet driver, is off.
2.46 Technical Data
Dimensions (Approximate)
Length............ 15 inches
Width .......... 4-1/2 inches
Height ............ 6 inches
Input .......... 115 v ac, 50-60 Hz
Environmental conditions... 40°F to 110° F ambient temperature


TELETYPE CORPORATION Skokie, Illinois, U.S.A.
SECTION 574-123-103TC
Issue 1, March 1973
UCC39 CALL CONTROL UNIT
GENERAL INFORMATION

1. GENERAL
1.01 This section provides general information on the UCC89 call control unit. This unit permits local or on-line operation of a 33 or 35 teletypewriter and features a data modem (moe'-dem) which permits operation on the direct distance dialing network without the need for a data set.
1.02 As shown in Figure 1, the basic call control unit consists of a circuit card assembly, a six-button keyswitch assembly, and a power supply, all mounted on a baseplate to form a self-contained unit. The complete unit mounts in the upper right side of the 33 teletypewriter. In a 35 teletypewriter the unit may be mounted in the upper right side (RO or KSR) or in the pedestal (ASR). In all installations it is connected to the adjunct units by cables.
1.03 The pushbutton switches permit mode switching, and the lamps in the pushbuttons indicate the operating modes. An alarm lamp provides an indication of low paper (friction feed sets) or paper out (sprocket feed sets).
1.04 Two circuit cards provide the control and signal conversion required for operation of the terminal. The TP322491 logic card controls the operating modes. The TP322490 modem (modulator/demodulator) card provides analog/digital conversions. The modulator part of this card converts the start-stop digital signals of the teletypewriter distributor to Frequency Shift Keyed (FSK) analog signals suitable for transmission on telephone lines. The demodulator converts FSK signals received from a remote terminal to dc signals suitable for the selector of the teletypewriter.
1.05 The power supply operates from the 115 volt, 50/60 Hz ac line. It provides fused ac and dc operating voltages for the call control unit and adjunct equipment.
1.06 When used with a Data Access Arrangement (DAA) and telephone handset, the call control unit provides all functions required to originate or answer calls and is completely compatible with 100 Series data sets (or equivalents). The system is shown in block diagram form in Figure 2. With a manual DAA (1000A or equivalent) the unit serves as a manual originate, manual answer data set. With an automatic DAA (1001B, 1001D, or equivalent) it serves aS a manual originate, auto answer data set. The telephone is a 502A or equivalent with an exclusion key.
1.07 Basic operation of the call control unit is half-duplex. However, it features a full duplex mode selectable by the operator. An echoplex mode is also selectable, whereby the unit returns or "echoes" signals to the remote transmitter so the remote operator can check the accuracy of the data exchange.
1.08 The following operating characteristics apply to the UCC89 call control unit:
Input Voltage
115 volts ac, 50/60 Hz, +0.75%
Input Current
0.5 amp (nominal) to satisfy 6 v and 24 v load requirements (1 amp each); 2.50 amp (max) to satisfy 33 or 35 motor, plus 0.85 amp (max) for convenience receptacle
Time Base
Asynchronous, start-stop serial code
Modem FSK Carrier Frequencies
Originate
Transmit (F1) — 1070 Hz (space)
1270 Hz (mark)
Receive (F2) — 2025 Hz (space)
2225 Hz (mark)

CAUTION: THIS EQUIPMENT IS INTENDED TO BE OPERATED WITHIN THE TEMPERATURE RANGE OF +40°F to +110°F. SERIOUS DAMAGE CAN RESULT IF THIS RANGE IS EXCEEDED. PARTICULAR CAUTION SHOULD BE EXERCISED IN USING ACOUSTICAL OR OTHER ENCLOSURES.

2. OPERATION
2.01 The operator activates the call control unit by means of the six pushbuttons illustrated in Figure 8. The functions of the pushbuttons and the indicator lamps within the buttons are as follows:
CLEAR/ALARM — A momentary pushbutton which lights (red) when depressed and clears the set of its operating mode. The lamp also lights to indicate a paper alarm condition.
LOCAL — A locking pushbutton which lights (green) when depressed and places the set in the local mode.
ORIG — A momentary pushbutton which lights (white) when depressed and conditions the set for on-line operation. The operator then establishes a connection with the remote station to exchange data.
ANS — A momentary pushbutton which lights (white) when depressed, and places the set in the receive mode after a connection is made with a remote station.
ECHO — A locking pushbutton which lights (white) when depressed and conditions the terminal for echoplex operation. Received signals are returned to the remote station to permit a check of transmission accuracy.
FDX — A push on, push off pushbutton which 'lights (white) when depressed and conditions the set for simultaneous transmission and reception of data (full duplex).
2.02 The UCC39 call control unit can be interfaced directly to a private telephone line or through a DAA to the direct distance dialing network. A manual DAA (1000A or equivalent) permits manual originate, manual answer service. An automatic DAA (1001B, 1001D or equivalent) permits manual originate, auto answer service. Calls are placed or answered through a telephone (502A or equivalent) adjunct to the DAA.

ORIGINATING A CALL
2.03 To originate a call, the operator lifts the telephone handset and dials the remote terminal. With an automatic DAA, the exclusion key must be lifted before dialing. If the remote terminal has auto answer capability, its f2 carrier will be heard in the handset. If the remote terminal is arranged for manual answer, it will not send the f2 carrier until the remote operator goes into the answer mode. When the f2 carrier is heard, the local operator depresses the ORIG button and goes on-line by hanging up the handset (auto DAA) or lifting the exclusion key (manual DAA). The teletypewriter motor turns on and the ORIG lamp lights. After a 400 ms delay (to disable the Telephone Company echo suppressors), the local terminal turns on its fl carrier to complete the data connection.

ANSWERING A CALL (MANUAL ANSWER)
2.04 An incoming call causes ringing at the local terminal. The operator answers the call and agrees to go into the data mode, depresses the ANS button, and goes on-line by lifting the exclusion key on the telephone. The teletypewriter motor turns on and the local terminal sends its f2 carrier to the remote terminal. The remote terminal completes the data link by turning on its f1 carrier. Upon receipt of fl, the ANS lamp lights. If the local terminal is equipped for auto answer-back, it transmits its answer-back to the remote terminal.

ANSWERING A CALL (AUTO ANSWER)
2.05 The call control unit can provide auto answer operation when used with an auto answer DAA. With the call control unit in the clear mode, an incoming call turns on the teletypewriter motor and initiates the answer mode. The local terminal sends its f2 carrier to the remote terminal, which responds by turning on its fl carrier to the local terminal. This completes the data link and lights the ANS lamp. If equipped for auto answer-back, the local terminal sends its answer-back to the remote terminal.
2.06 If an auto answer terminal is in the local mode, the auto answer operation is inhibited but an incoming call causes the ANS lamp to flash. The operator can then go into the answer mode by depressing the ANS button, or can remain in the local mode and answer the call by lifting the handset. If the ANS button is depressed, the local button unlocks and its lamp goes out, and the f2 carrier is sent to the remote terminal. The remote terminal responds with its f1 carrier. The ANS lamp lights, and if equipped for auto answer-back, the local terminal sends its answer-back to the remote terminal.

DISCONNECTING A CALL
2.07 Disconnect in the originate or answer mode occurs upon receipt of an EOT character, upon loss of carrier, or upon depression of the CLEAR button. With a manual DAA, the handset must be placed on-hook to complete the disconnect.

FULL DUPLEX OPERATION
2.08 The call control unit provides simultaneous transmission and reception of data (full duplex operation) when the FDX button is depressed in the originate or answer mode. The FDX lamp lights when the button is depressed. Received data is printed out by the teletypewriter, but transmitted data does not provide a printout. To restore half-duplex operation the FDX button is depressed a second time.
Note: Full duplex operation is not possible with an RO unit.

ECHO OPERATION
2.09 When the ECHO button is depressed, incoming data is returned to the remote sender for verification of accuracy. The sender must be operating full duplex to receive the echo. The ECHO button is a locking pushbutton which lights when depressed. To release the button, the operator depresses the CLEAR or LOCAL button.

LOCAL OPERATION
2.10 Local operation permits preparation of printed copy (33 or 35 KSR or ASR) and punched tape (33 or 35 ASR) without on-line operation. When the LOCAL button is depressed, the button locks and the lamp lights (green). All local functions can be performed, but on-line transmission or reception is inhibited. The operator can place or answer calls via the DAA, but must manually initiate on-line operation by depressing the ORIG or ANS button. This unlocks the LOCAL button and enables on-line operation.

OPTIONS
2.11 Option screws on the TP322491 logic card permit the following features in the operation of the call control unit:
Send Inhibit — When this option screw is installed, it prevents the keyboard (KSR or ASR) and reader (ASR) from transmitting to the remote terminal in the echo mode. With the screw omitted, the keyboard and reader transmit in the echo mode.
Paper Alarm — When the option screw is installed, a low paper (friction feed) or paper out (sprocket feed) condition, lights the ALARM lamp (red) but has no effect on the send and receive functions of the terminal. With the screw omitted, a paper alarm lights the lamp and also prevents call connection with a remote station. On TP322491 cards previous to Issue 4, disconnect also occurs on existing calls.
Answer-back Trip — With this screw installed, the answer-back is tripped automatically when the answer mode has been established. With the screw omitted, the answer-back is not automatically sent upon call connection.

3. CIRCUIT DESCRIPTIONS
3.01 The circuitry of the UCC39 call control unit is contained on two circuit cards: the TP322491 logic card and TP322490 modem card. Operating voltages and currents are provided by the TP188865 power supply. The functions of the circuits are outlined in the following circuit descriptions. Complete schematic diagrams and detailed circuit descriptions are contained in Wiring Diagram Package WDP0341.

CONTROL LOGIC CARD (TP3822491)
3.02 The TP322491 circuit card provides the control logic and interface between the teletypewriter and the telephone line. A Data Access Arrangement (DAA) with telephone set is required to place and answer calls on the direct distance dialing network.

A. Send Data Circuits
3.03 The send data circuits of the control logic card are shown schematically in Figure 4. The distributor contacts are connected through the normally closed Break contacts and P7-11 to the base of Q10. With a mark (closed contact) in the distributor, Q10 is on and produces a high at MLA3-9. This drives MLA3-8 low, producing a low on the Send Data lead. An Aux Send Data input is provided at P16-4, and a mark (low) applied at this point will also produce a low on the Send Data lead.
3.04 A space (open distributor contact or +24 v on Aux Send Data lead) causes Q10 to turn off, producing a low at MLA3-9 and a high on the Send Data lead.
3.05 The Send Inhibit option screw prevents data from being sent on-line when the ECHO button is depressed. With this option enabled, the Send Data lead is blinded by a low at MLA3-4 when the ECHO button is depressed. With the option disabled, the ECHO contacts have no effect on the Send Data lead.
3.06 An open Break contact disconnects the distributor contacts from Q10, and thus prevents the Send Data lead from following the changes in the distributor.

B. Selector Magnet Driver
3.07 The selector magnet driver is shown in Figure 5. Transistors Q11 and Q14, which drive the selector magnet, are controlled by a set of gates (and the Aux Rec Data input) wired-OR to the base of Q11. A high at MLB3-3, MLA2-6, MLB3-6, and the Aux Rec Data lead represents a mark, which turns on Q11 and Q14 and energizes the selector magnet. A low at any of the above points places a low (space) on Q11, turning Q11 and Q14 off to de-energize the selector magnet.
3.08 Gate MLA2-6 provides the selector drive signals in the local mode. With the LOCAL button depressed, a high applied through P15-5 to MLA2-4 enables this gate. Marks and spaces on the Send Data lead are applied to MLA2-5 to produce change at MLA2-6.
3.09 In the send mode, MLB3-3 provides the selector drive signals which provide local copy of the transmitted data. Assuming the FDX button is not depressed, a high at MLB3-2 enables this gate so it follows the signals on the Send Data lead (output of Figure 4). If the FDX button is depressed, a low is applied to MLB3-2 and the gate is disabled. However, if the ECHO button is depressed, the low is blocked from MLB38-2 and the returned signals are printed out.
3.10 Local. printout in the receive mode is controlled by MLB3-6. This gate is enabled by the On-Line signal at MLB3-5. The signals received from the demodulator (modem card TP322490) then provide variations at MLB3-4, resulting in mark and space variations at MLB3-6.
3.11 The Aux Rec Data lead permits overation from  user-supplied equipment connected to P16-9.

C. Originate/Answer Mode Control
3.12 The originate or answer mode selection is provided by the circuitry of Figure 6. The state of dc flip-flop MLA2-8/MLA2-11 provides alternate highs or lows on the Ans Mode and Orig Mode leads. The reset state of this flip-flop is MLA2-8 high and MLA2-11 low (answer mode). Reset is provided by alow at MLA2-9.
3.13 To place the circuit in the originate mode, the ORIG button is depressed. This places a low on MLA2-138, setting the flip-flop so that MLA2-11 is high and MLA2-8 is low. The low at MLA2-8, applied to MLB2-13, causes MLB2-12 to go high, turning on Q8 and Q7. This energizes the originate relay. The circuit remains in this state until a reset is applied to MLA2-9 or the ANS button is depressed to produce a high at MLA1-3. A high at MLA1-3 drives MLA1-4 and MLA2-10 low, resetting the flip-flop to the answer state and thus deenergizing the originate relay.

D. On-Line Control
3.14 The circuitry of Figure 7 initiates online operation in response to manual originate, manual answer, or auto answer control signals. In the off-line or reset state, this circuit provides a low at MLC3-3 and a high at MLC3-6.
3.15 Assuming the ANS button is not depressed, a low is applied through P15-9 to MLA1-13. This places a high at MLA1-12, and this high applied to MLC83-2 has no effect on the on-line flip-flop. If the ANS button is depressed, MLA1-13 goes high. This forces MLA1-12 and MLC3-2 low, setting the flip-flop to the on-line state (MLC3-3 high and MLC3-6 low).
3.16 Auto answer is provided by the R.I. contacts of an automatic DAA. Incoming ring pulses on the R.I. lead are integrated by C8 and after approximately a 200 ms delay, present a low at MLC3-1. This low sets the flip-flop to the on-line state.
3.17 The Orig Mode lead from the originate/ answer flip-flop is monitored by MLA1-2. When the ORIG button is depressed (Figure 6), the resulting high on the Orig Mode lead forces MLA1-2 low. This low, applied to MLC83-2, sets the on-line flip-flop to the on-line state.
3.18 A high on the On-Line output of the flip-flop serves as an enabling signal on MLBs-9. The signals at the Send Data lead (MLB3-10) produce variations at MLB3-8 which are inverted by MLA3-6 and applied to the modulator of modem card TP322490.
3.19 Gate MLB3-11 is used to couple the demodulator output to the modulator when the echo mode is selected. In their normal position the ECHO switch contacts disable this gate by applying a low to MLB3-12. When the ECHO button is depressed the contacts open and the gate is enabled. The demodulated signal at MLB3-13 is gated through MLB3-11 and MLA3-6 to the modulator, where it is transmitted to the remote terminal.

E. Motor Control
3.20 The circuits controlling the motor control relay and the off-hook and tape reader control relays are also shown in Figure 7. In the on-line mode, the low at MLC3-6 is inverted to produce a high at MLA3-2. This turns on Q18, energizing the off-hook, motor control, and tape reader control relays. In the clear mode MLC3-6 is high and MLA3-2 is low to turn off Q13. This de-energizes all three relays. In the local mode transistor Q13 is again turned off by a high at MLA3-2. However, the normally open contacts of the LOCAL switch close and energize the motor control and tape reader control relays. The off-hook relay is not energized in this mode because it is blocked from the local contacts by CR5.
3.21 A DC1 signal can be used to energize the tape reader relay. As shown in Figure 7, the DC1 provides a stunt box contact closure to ground which energizes the tape reader control relay. The off-hook relay is blocked by CR5 as explained for local operation.

F. Carrier Control, Originate/Answer Lamps
3.22 The circuit of Figure 8 monitors the carrier received by modem card TP322490 and the state of the originate/answer flip-flop (Figure 6) to light the ORIG or ANS lamp and to control the local carrier supplied to the remote terminal by the modem.
3.23 The Carrier Detect signal (high) from the modem is applied through P2-8 to MLB2-3, producing a low at MLB2-4. This low is inverted by MLB2-10 to produce a high at MLA2-2 and MLB1-2. Depending on the state of the originate/answer flip-flop, MLA2-3 or MLB1-3 will go low. If the ANS button is depressed the flip-flop will be in the answer mode and a high at MLB1-1 will cause MLB1-3 to go low. This low, applied to MLB1-12, forces MLB1-11 high and turns on Q1 to energize the ANS lamp. The high on the Ans Mode lead is also applied to MLB1-10. With a high on the On-Line lead (MLB1-9), MLB1-8 goes low and forces MLB1-6 high to turn on the Carrier Control lead. The Carrier Control signal, fed to the modem, turns on the carrier to the remote terminal. In the answer mode, a low on the Orig Mode lead disables MLA2-3 to prevent the ORIG lamp from turning on.
3.24 If the auto answer option is enabled, R.I. signals from an auto DAA are applied through P16-11 to MLB1-13. Each ring pulse places a low on MLB1-18, forcing MLB1-11 high to turn on Q1 and energize the ANS lamp. Thus, the lamp flashes to indicate the call. The operator can answer the call or depress the ANS button to place the terminal in the answer mode.
3.25 If the ORIG button is depressed, the originate/answer flip-flop places a high on MLA2-1 to enable this gate. A Carrier Detect signal from the modem results in a high on MLA2-2, forcing MLA2-3 low. Transistor Q9 is normally on, and turns off when MLA2-3 goes low. Monostable multivibrator MLC1 times-out in approximately 450 ms, determined by the C5R6 charge time, and MLC1-6 then goes high to turn on Q2 and energize the ORIG lamp. MLC1-8 goes low when MLC1 times-out, and this low serves as a clock pulse to flip MLC2. The resulting low at MLC2-8 is applied to MLB1-4, forcing MLB1-6 high. This high is applied through P2-7 to the modem, where it is used to produce the carrier to the remote terminal.
3.26 If the terminal is switched out of the originate mode, or if the carrier is lost, the resulting low at MLA2-1 or MLA2-2 forces MLA2-3 high to turn on QQ. This causes MLC1 to revert to its initial state, and the low at MLC1-6 turns off Q2 to de-energize the ORIG lamp. However, the high at MLC1-8 has no effect on MLC2. This flip-flop does not reset and turn off the Carrier Control lead until the on-line flip-flop is reset to place a low on MLC2-10.
3.27 The Demod (P2-14) and Remote Carr Aux Control (P16-10) leads provide normal and inverted equivalents of the Carrier Detect signal for customer-provided equipment and for demodulator data receive circuits.

G. Answer-back Control
3.28 Figure 9 shows the circuits that control the answer-back. The inputs to this circuit are obtained from the carrier control, originate/answer circuits of Figure 8. The input at MLB2-9 is the gated Ans Mode and On-Line signal from MLB1-8 in Figure 8. The input at MLB2-5 is the inverted Carrier Detect signal from MLB2-4 in Figure 8. The outputs at MLB2-8 and MLB2-6 are wired-OR to control the state of the answer-back flip-flop.
3.29 With no carrier from the remote terminal, and with the local terminal in other than the answer mode, MLB2-9 and MLB2-5 are both high. This places a low on the K and SD inputs of the flip-flop, and at MLC3-10. The low on MLC3-10 holds MLC3-8 high, forcing MLC3-11 low to turn off Q12 and prevent the answer-back from being tripped. In this state the answer-back can be operated only by depressing the HERE IS key.
3.30 When the carrier is received from the remote terminal, MLB2-5 goes low and MLB2-6 attempts to go high. If the terminal is in the answer mode, (a low at MLB2-9), the wired - OR is permitted to go high because of the highs at both MLB2-8 and MLB2-6. This high is applied to MLC3-10. The flip-flop is initially in its set state, so MLC2-6 is high, placing a high on MLC3-9. Thus, the high on MLC3-10 forces MLC3-8 low. MLC3-11 goes high, turning on Q12 and energizing the answer-back trip magnet.
3.31 The Send Data lead is connected to the clock pulse input of the flip-flop. Once the answer-back cycle is initiated, the first space-to-mark transition of the answer-back message clocks the flip-flop and switches MLC2-6 low. This low, applied to MLC3-9, forces MLC38-8 high and MLC3-11 low to turn off Q12 and de-energize the trip magnet. The flip-flop remains in this state until MLB2-8 or MLB2-6 goes low to set it back to its initial state for the next call. Thus, a call in the answer mode triggers a cycle of the answer-back, and the answer-back message itself turns off the trigger circuit.

H. Reset Circuits
3.32 The manual and automatic reset circuits of Figure 10 are used to reset the various control circuits on the TP322491 logic card. A power-on reset is provided by capacitor C6 whenever the terminal is turned on. The initial low across C6 provides a high at MLA1-10 and a low at MLA1-6 which serves as a reset pulse for the logic circuits. C6 charges in approximately 200 ms, effectively removing the reset pulse to permit circuit operation. Diode CR2 limits the voltage across C6 to about 6.5 v. Diode CR1 discharges C6 rapidly when the power is turned off.
3.33 Reset is also produced by closure of the EOT contacts or by depressing the CLEAR button, either of which places a low directly on the wired-OR which forms the Reset lead. Depressing the LOCAL button provides a reset by placing a high on MLA3-11 and thereby forcing MLA3-10 low.
3.34 If the Paper Alarm option screw is omitted, reset is also produced by a paper alarm condition. When the alarm occurs, the normally closed contacts open to place a high on MLA1-9. This forces MLA1-8 low, providing a reset which inhibits answering any further calls. The normally open contacts close to energize the ALARM lamp. If the paper alarm option screw is installed, a permanent low is placed on MLA1-9. The only effect of the alarm condition is then to light the ALARM lamp.
3.35 Absence of remote carrier also produces a reset. When the terminal goes on-line, the on-line flip-flop (Figure 7) places a high on MLA3-138. This forces MLA3-12 low, turning off Q4, Q6, and Q3. With Q3 off, C7 charges toward +6 v through R10. When the charge reaches about -0.5 v (nominally 25 seconds), Q5 turns on. If the remote carrier is not present at the drain when Q5 turns on, a low is coupled to the source to provide a reset. Loss of carrier during transmission has the same effect. The timer is disabled when the on-line flip-flop is reset.

MODEM CARD (TP3822490)
3.36 The TP322490 circuit card operates as a modulator/demodulator (modem) to provide signal conversion between the teletypewriter and telephone line. The modulator receives start-stop dc signals from the teletypewriter distributor and produces Frequency Shift Keying (FSK) signals suitable for transmission on the telephone line. The demodulator receives FSK signals from a remote terminal and converts them to dc signals suitable for operation of the teletypewriter. When used with the TP322491 logic card and a Data Access Arrangement (DAA), the modem provides all functions of a low speed FSK data set.
3.37 The circuits on the modem card are illustrated in Figures 11 through 15. These circuits are shown in their entirety in wiring diagram 1216SD. They are broken-up and simplified in this section to emphasize the basic elements of the modem, which are described in the following paragraphs.

A. Tone Input/Output Circuits
3.38 The circuits of Figure 11 select and filter the marking and spacing tones fed from the modulator to the DAA and from the DAA to the demodulator. Switching is provided by relay K1, which responds to the Transmit Band signal from the originate/answer flip-flop on logic card TP322491. Filtering is provided by a low-pass filter (Z3, Z4, C19, C22, and C23) and a high-pass filter (Z1, Z2, C17, C20, and C21). Transformer Tl provides impedance matching between the DAA or telephone line and the filter circuits.
3.39 In the answer mode, the Transmit Band signal applied through J2-13 is low and relay K1 is de-energized. The K1 contacts are in the normal states shown in Figure 11. Incoming carrier signals applied between J2-12 and J2-15 are stepped up by T1 and applied to the filters. Low frequency tones (1070 Hz = F1 space; 1270 Hz = F1 mark) are passed through the low-pass filter and contacts 8, 9 of K1 to the demodulator amplifier. High frequency tones (2025 Hz = F2 space; 2225 Hz = F2 mark) are passed from the modulator through contacts 5, 6 of Kl and through the high-pass filter to T1, where they are coupled to the DAA or telephone line for transmission to the remote terminal.
3.40 In the originate mode, the originate/answer flip-flop applies a +24 v Transmit Band signal to J2-13, energizing relay K1. The K1 contacts change states, so the output of the high-pass filter is connected through contacts 10, 9 to the demodulator, and the modulator is connected through contacts 6, 7 to the input of the low-pass filter. Thus, low frequency tones from the modulator (1070 Hz = F1 space; 1270 Hz = Fl mark) are passed through the low-pass filter to Tl, and are coupled to the DAA or telephone line. High frequency tones from the remote terminal (2025 Hz = F2 space; 2225 Hz = F2 mark) are passed through the filter to the demodulator.
3.41 As a result of this switching action, the demodulator receives high band signals (F2s and F2m) in the originate mode and low band signals (Fls and F1m) in the answer mode, and the modulator supplies low band signals (F1s and F1lm) in the originate mode and high band signals (F2s and F2m) in the answer mode. The filters prevent unwanted frequency conponents from interfering with the operation of the circuits.

B. Demodulator Amplifier/Limiter and Discriminator Driver
3.42 Received tones are fed from the filter circuit through the K1 relay contacts to linear operational amplifier and limiter (OP1) as shown in Figure 12. The output of amplifier/limiter OP1 is applied to phase inverter Q4 and push-pull output transistors Q2 and Q8, which drive the primaries of discriminator transformers T2 and T3.
3.43 Transformer T2 is tuned to a frequency above the marking tone frequency (1270 or 2225 Hz), and T3 is tuned to a frequency below the spacing tone frequency (1070 or 2025 Hz). Thus, the voltage across T2 is high for marking tones and the voltage across T3 is high for spacing tones, and because of the push-pull operation the two voltages are out of phase. This results in the conventional S-shaped response curve for discriminator operation.

C. Discriminator Circuits
3.44 The discriminator circuits are shown in Figure 13. The tapped secondaries of T2 and—T3 provide full-wave detection. The secondaries are tuned by capacitors C11 and Cl (plus C12 and C13 through the normally closed K1 contacts) in the answer mode. This provides detection of the 1070 Hz spacing tones (F1s) and 1270 Hz marking tones (F1lm) received in the answer mode. In the originate mode the K1 contacts open to remove C12 and C13 from the secondary circuits. This reduces the capacitance and thereby raises the resonant frequencies of the T2 and T3 secondaries to detect the 2025 Hz spacing tones (F2s) and 2225 Hz marking tones (F2m) in the originate mode.
3.45 The mark and space outputs appear across R1C2 and R4C8, respectively. These dc voltages are series opposing so the spacing tones produce a negative output (the negative voltage across R4C3 exceeds the positive voltage across R1C2) and the marking tones produce a positive output (the positive voltage across R1C2 exceeds the negative voltage across R4C3).
3.46 The output of the discriminator is fed through low-pass filter R2C4, which attenuates any remaining carrier frequencies, to the gate of buffer amplifier Q1. This FET saturates when the carrier is marking (positive voltage on the gate), producing a low Receive Data Out at J2-14. The FET cuts off when the carrier is spacing (negative voltage on the gate), producing a high Receive Data Out. An unbuffered Receive Data Out signal is applied directly from the discriminator output to J2-11 for customer use.

D. Carrier Detect Circuit
3.47 The Carrier Detect signal is produced by the circuit of Figure 14. This circuit samples the signal voltages across discriminator transformers T2 and T3 and produces an output only if adequate carrier is received. The carrier signals are coupled through C36 or C35 to C6. The pulses are rectified by CR7 in the base circuit of Q5. The output of Q5 is amplified and inverted by Q6 to produce a high at J2-8 when carrier is present and a low when no carrier or insufficient carrier is present. Capacitor C16 introduces a delay of approximately 0.2 second between the time carrier is present and the time the Carrier Detect signal appears at J2-8.

E. Modulator Circuit
3.48 The modulator produces the marking and spacing tones to be transmitted to the remote terminal. As shown in Figure 15, the clock pulses provided by a crystal-controlled oscillator are used to drive a nine-stage binary counter. The outputs of the counter stages are connected to four decoders which establish the high and low frequency marking and spacing tones.
3.49 The oscillator supplies a 1.00064 MHz clock signal to the first stage of the counter, which serves as a frequency divider. Each decoder receives inputs from all nine counter stages. The normal or inverted leads from the counter are selected so that all nine inputs to a given decoder are high on the following counts:
Fils - 467 F2s - 247
F1lm - 394 F2m - 225
The clock pulse (CK) is also applied to each decoder. This negative pulse inhibits the decoders so the outputs cannot change until the clock pulse ends. This gives the counter stages time to switch to their new states and insures that the correct count will be decoded.
3.51 The Transmit Band and D.C. Data signals are also used to control the decoders. The Transmit Band signal is an indication of whether the terminal is in the originate or answer mode, and therefore selects either the low band (F1) or high band (F2) decoders. In the originate mode this signal is high to enable the two F1 decoders, and is inverted by MLA4-3 to disable the two F2 decoders. In the answer mode it is low to disable the F1 decoders and enable the F2 decoders.
3.52 The remaining control signal, D.C. Data, enables or disables spacing decoders Fl1s and F2s. As indicated in Figure 15, this signal is high for a space (enable) and low for a mark (disable).
3.53 To see how the modulator generates the desired tone frequencies, assume the terminal is in the originate mode. The high Transmit Band signal enables F1ls and F1lm and disables F2s and F2m. The Fls and F1m carriers will therefore be produced by marking and spacing signals on the D.C. Data lead.
3.04 A mark (low) on the D.C. Data lead disables the F1ls decoder, and is also inverted by MLA4-6 to place an enabling signal (high) on MLA3-1, 2, 4. When the count reaches 394, the output of the F1lm decoder goes low. This low, applied to MLA4-9, sets MLA4-8 high to place a high on MLA3B-5. Since MLA3-1, 2, 4 is held high by the marking signal, the high at MLA3-5 forces MLA3-6 low. This low is applied to the set direct leads of all counter stages, resetting the counter. It is also applied to the trigger input of a divide-by-2 flip-flop to toggle the flip-flop, and it is applied to MLA4-13 to reset the dc flip-flop and remove the high from MLA3-5. The reset on the counter clears the counter stages and thereby removes the reset pulse. The duration of the reset pulse is less than 100 ns, the nominal switching time of the logic.
3.55 The counter continues to cycle to the count of 394 as long as the mark is present on the D.C. Data lead. Each reset pulse at MLA3-6 is used to trigger the divide-by-2 flip-flop, and the output of the flip-flop changes for every reset pulse at its trigger input. The result is a square wave applied through R32 to amplifier @7, which inverts the signal and applies it to the Mod Output lead.
3.56 At the clock frequency of 1.00064 MHz, the count of 394 produces a pulse frequency of approximately 2540 Hz at the output of the Flm decoder. Since the flip-flop toggles on every input pulse, the frequency of the rectangular wave at the modulator output is 1270 Hz, which is the desired marking tone frequency in the originate mode.
3.57 A space (high) on the D.C. Signal lead enables the F1s decoder and, inverted by MLA4-6, places a disabling signal (low) on MLA3-1, 2, 4. Although the output of F1m goes low at a count of 394, this change cannot be transferred to MLA3-6 as it was in 3.54. The count therefore continues to 467, which forces the Fl1ls output low to provide counter reset and toggle the divide-by-2 flip-flop. The next count of 467 toggles the flip-flop as explained in 3.54, and the Mod Output is a rectangular wave at the desired spacing tone frequency (1070 Hz) as long as the spacing signal is present on the D.C. Data lead.
3.08 Notice that flip-flop MLA4-8, MLA4-11 is set by a low from the output of the Flm decoder every count of 394, even though this action has no effect on the output when a space is present. If a space-to-mark transition occurs between the count of 394 and 467, MLA3-6 goes low to produce a reset and trigger the divide-by-2 flip-flop.

POWER SUPPLY (TP188865)
3.09 The TP188865 power supply provides the dc operating voltages for the control and modem circuits of the call control unit. It also provides fused and switched ac operating voltages for the related equipment. The power supply circuitry is represented in the simplified diagram of Figure 16. More detailed circuitry is presented in wiring diagram 1195SD.
3.60 The 115 v ac obtained through the power cord is applied through power on/off switch S1 to the convenience outlet. This voltage can be used to operate equipment with a maximum power rating of 100 watts.
3.61 The Line Side (LS) of the line voltage is fused by F1 and applied to one of the normally open contacts of the motor control relay (K1). The LS line is connected through fuse F2 to one end of the power transformer primary. The Ground Side (GS) of the line is connected to the convenience outlet, to P14-11, and to the other side of the power transformer primary.
3.62 The secondary of power transformer T1 is tapped to provide the various operating voltages required by the call control unit. The full secondary voltage is applied to two full-wave rectifiers and filters which provide +24 v and -24 v dc outputs at P14-6 and P14-9, respectively. A portion of the secondary voltage is applied to a full wave rectifier and filter to provide +6 v dc which is fused and regulated to provide a regulated +6 v dc output at P14-10. A 6 v ac is applied from the secondary of T1 to P14-3. The common lead for each of these voltages terminates at P14-14 and P14-15.
3.63 The +24 v output is applied through current-limiting resistor R3 to P14-2. This output provides current for the selector magnet of the teletypewriter (Figure 5). The +24 v output is also applied to motor control relay K1, which connects through P14-13 to the motor control circuitry (Figure 7).
3.64 As indicated by the broken line in Figure 16, the rectifier, filter, and regulator circuits are a part of circuit card TP303846. The card connector terminals are indicated by the numbered circles in the diagram.

4. INSTALLATION
4.01 The UCC39 call control unit is usually shipped assembled in the cabinet and connected to the teletypewriter. In this case the installer is required only to provide the signal and ac power connections and to check for any options or adjustments that may be necessary. If the call control unit is supplied separately, the installer must mount it in the cabinet and provide the necessary connections.
INSTALLING THE CALL CONTROL UNIT
4.02 The following instructions cover the various types of installation. Select the appropriate set of instructions and disregard those that do not apply.
A. Assembling the UCC39 Into a 33 RO, KSR, or ASR
4.03 With the cover of the teletypewriter open, position the call control unit so its mounting tabs align with the mounting holes on the right side of the teletypewriter base pan. Secure the unit to the base pan with the four mounting screws supplied with the unit. When the unit is properly mounted and adjusted, the pushbuttons on the keyswitch assembly will extend through the opening when the cover is closed.
4.04 Connect. the cables from the teletypewriter to connectors 3 through 8 at the rear of the call control unit. (The connectors are numbered for identification.) Attach the ground lead at the rear of the UCC39 base to the corresponding tab on the 33 base pan.
4.05 Proceed with the interface cable connections, option check, and signal level adjustment in 4.30 through 4.33.
B. Assembling the UCC39 Into a 35 RO or KSR
4.06 With the cover of the teletypewriter open, position the call control circuit so its mounting tabs align with the mounting holes on the right side of the teletypewriter cabinet base. Secure the unit to the base pan with the four mounting screws supplied with the unit.
4.07 Remove the keyswitch assembly from its mounting bracket by loosening the four mounting screws and lockwashers (two each side; Figure 17). Remount the keyswitch assembly on adjustable bracket TP192270 of the teletypewriter cabinet base (front of call control unit) using the four TP181242 screws and TP125015 lockwashers supplied in the TP344395 set of parts.
Note: The answer-back relay and mounting hardware referred to in the following instructions are supplied with the TP344395 set of parts.
4.08 Assemble the TP178306 answer-back relay to the TP344353 bracket with two TP181242 screws inserted from the underside of the relay (Figure 18).
4.09 Connect the TP344355 cable leads to the relay terminals as indicated in Table A.
4.10 Mount the TP344354 insulator over the relay and bracket as shown in Figure 18. Secure the assembly with two TP7002 flat washers and TP3598 nuts on the TP181242 screws installed previously (Figure 18).
4.11 Mount the relay on the brackets from which the keyswitch assembly was removed. Secure the relay assembly by tightening the four mounting screws.
4.12 Connect the TP344355 cable leads to the terminals of the "T" power terminal block at the rear of the electrical service assembly as indicated in Table A.
4.13 Connect the cables from the electrical service assembly to connectors 3 through 8 at the rear of the call control unit. The connectors are numbered for identification.
4.14 Place a TP121249 cable clamp (TP344395 set of parts) on the TP344355 cable and secure the clamp to the LESU frame with a TP153841 screw, TP7002 flat washer, and TP3598 nut.
4.15 Insert the TP186164 strap (TP344395 set of parts) in holes 8 and 9 of the "K" connector of the LESU.
4.16 Proceed with the interface cable connections, option check, and signal level adjustment in 4.30 through 4.33.
C. Assembling the UCC39 Into a 35 ASR
4.17 Remove cable connector 15 from its connector on the UCC39.
4.18 Remove the keyswitch assembly from its mounting bracket by loosening the four mounting screws and lockwashers (two each side; Figure 17). Remount the keyswitch assembly on adjustable bracket TP192270 of the cabinet base using the four TP181242 screws and TP125015 lockwashers supplied in the TP344395 set of parts.
Note: The answer-back relay and mounting hardware referred to in the following instructions are supplied with the TP344395 set of parts.
4.19 Assemble the TP178306 answer-back relay to the TP344353 bracket with two TP181242 screws inserted from the underside of the relay (Figure 18).
4.20 Connect the TP344608 cable leads to the relay terminals as indicated in Table A.
4.21 Mount the TP344354 insulator over the relay and bracket as shown in Figure 18. Secure the assembly with two TP7002 flat washers and TP3598 nuts on the TP181242 screws installed previously (Figure 18).
4.22 Mount the relay on the brackets from which the keyswitch assembly was removed. Secure the relay assembly by tightening the four mounting screws.
4.23 Mount the call control unit near the right end of the lower shelf on the pedestal of the teletypewriter. Use the two TP153441 mounting screws, TP3639 lockwashers, and TP125231 nuts supplied with the call control unit. Insert the screws, with lockwashers, through the UCC39 baseplate into the pedestal shelf, and mount the nuts from the underside of the shelf.
4.24 Connect the TP344608 cable leads to the terminal of the "T" power terminal block at the rear of the electrical service assembly as indicated in Table A.
4.25 Connect the cables from the electrical service assembly to connectors 3 through 8 at the rear of the call control unit. The connectors are numbered for identification.
4.26 Connect the male plug end of the TP344602 extension cable to connector 15 of the cable from the keyswitch assembly. Connect the other end of the extension cable to connector 15 of the call control unit.
4.27 Place a TP121249 cable clamp (TP344395 set of parts) on the TP344603 cable and secure the clamp to the LESU frame with a TP153841 screw, TP7002 flat washer, and TP3598 nut.
4.28 Insert the TP186164 strap (TP344395 set of parts) in holes 6 and 8 of the "E" connector of the LESU.
4.29 Proceed with the interface cable connections, option check, and signal level adjustments in 4.30 through 4.33.

CONNECTING THE INTERFACE CABLE
4.30 The interface cable (connector 16) must be connected to the DAA. The cable leads are connected by ring terminals to the corresponding DAA connection points as indicated in Table B. All leads are used for an auto DAA. Only the DT (orange) and DR (red) leads are used for a manual DAA, and the remaining leads may be cut or taped.
4.31 Three screw options are provided on the TP322491 logic card. Sets are usually shipped with the options preprogrammed to the customer's order. The installer should check and, if necessary, program the options as shown in Table C. The screws are labeled on the circuit card.

SIGNAL LEVEL ADJUSTMENT
4.32 The level of the modulator output signal is set by potentiometer R32 on the TP322490 card. This level is preset before the call control circuit is shipped, but may require some adjustment at the time of installation.
4.33 The output level is factory adjusted to -6 +1/2 dBm. If the specified input to the DAA is -6 dBm, as determined by the installer of the DAA, no further adjustment is required. If the specified maximum level to the DAA is other than -6 dBm, the level should be adjusted accordingly. This is done by connecting a 600 ohm noninductive resistor across the DT and DR leads of the interface cable and, with a voltmeter across the resistor, adjusting R32 to the following voltage level:
- 8dBm— 0.3 v
0 dBm — 0.8 v
-2 dBm — 0.6 v
-4dBm — 0.5v
-6 dBm - 0.4 v
-10 dBm — 0.25 v
-12dBm — 0.2Vv
After the adjustment is complete, cement R32 with a drop of ylyptol as shown in Figure 19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

TELETYPE CORPORATION SECTION 574-124-100TC
Skokie, Illinois, U.S.A. Issue 4, June 1974

33 TAPE READER
GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION
CONTENTS PAGE 1, GENERAL
3. PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION
OUTLINE OF OPERATION
3.01 The tape reader senses coded intelligence perforated in tape and transmits this intelligence as a parallel output.
3.02 The tape reader package consists of three mechanisms; the reader mechanism, the power pack, and the distributor trip mechanism (Figure 2).
3.03 The reader mechanism senses and feeds the tape. Other submechanisms within the reader mechanism transmit the intelligence as a parallel output. The reader mechanism mounts on the left side of the typing unit.
3.04 The power pack provides direct current for the reader mechanism. The power pack is normally a part of the call control unit. Optionally, the power pack may be mounted in the stand.
3.05 The distributor mechanism receives the reader mechanism output and converts it into serial start-stop signals.

DETAILED OPERATION
A. Tape Lid Mechanism
3.06 When the tape lid latch handle is moved to the right, the spring biased tape lid Swings open. Two locating pins guide the tape as it travels above the top of the plate (Figure 3).

B. Control Mechanism
In the manual reader there are three positions for the control lever: START, STOP, and FREE. In the automatic reader there are four positions for the control lever: MANUAL START, AUTO, MANUAL STOP, and FREE. When the control lever is moved to the START position (MANUAL START position for the automatic reader — Figure 4) the spring biased start contact wires are positioned on the start contact. Since the start contact wires and the start contact are wired in series with the distributor clutch trip coil in the typing unit, the coil energizes and releases the tape reader trip lever (Figure 5).

C. Distributor Trip Mechanism
3.08 When released the tape reader trip lever performs two functions; it closes the tape reader feed magnet contact assembly and trips the distributor clutch (Figure 5). The reader insulator on the back of the tape reader trip lever. In its travel, the tape reader trip lever rotates the distributor clutch stop bail by means of a projection. This motion is transferred to the distributor clutch trip lever which moves away from the shoe lever. The distributor feed magnet contact assembly is closed — clutch engages and the distributor cycle begins.

D. Feed Magnet Mechanism
3.09 With the feed magnet contacts closed (Figure 5) the feed magnet in the reader mechanism is activated. The energized feed magnet coil attracts the armature (Figure 6). Rotating about its pivot the armature raises the armature extensions. Fastened to the ends of the armature extensions is a sensing pin guide.

E. Sensing Pin Guide Mechanism
3.10 In its upward travel the sensing pin guide carries with it eight spring-biased pins which sense the tape. Where a hole exists in the tape (marking) the sensing pin continues its upward travel and its associated spring remains unstretched. Where no hole exists in the tape (spacing) the sensing pin travel is blocked and its associated spring becomes stretched (Figure 6).

F. Contact Block Mechanism
There is an insulator attached to each sensing pin. The insulators hold eight contact springs in a down position, away from the contact bar (Figure 7). The eight contact springs are connected in parallel tocorresponding segments on the distributor disc in the typing unit. If a sensing pin finds a hole in the tape (marking) it continues its upward travel. The insulator attached to it also rises, allowing the contact spring to make contact with the contact bar (Figure 7). If a sensing pin does not find a hole in the tape (spacing) it remains in the down position, keeping the insulator down. This prevents the contact spring from making contact with the contact bar. Since all eight pins rise up Simultaneously, the output going from the contact block to the distributor disc will bea parallel output.

G. Tape Feed Mechanism
3.12 The tape feeding cycle begins when the feed magnet attracts the armature as described in3.09. The right armature extension has a feed pawl attached to it which engages a tooth on the feed ratchet when the armature extensions rise (Figure 8). Before the feed pawl can be pulled down to advance the feed wheel one character a series of steps take place as follows.
3.13 If the control lever is held in the START position, the distributor clutch trip coil will remain energized (Figure 9).
3.14 Near the beginning of the stop pulse the camming surface on the reader trip lever rides the camming roller on the distributor shaft and overtravels the trip coil armature (Figure 10).
3.15 The feed magnet contacts open momentarily causing the feed magnet in the reader mechanism to be de-energized (Figure 11).
3.16 With the feed magnet de-energized the armature extensions drop, withdrawing the sensing pin guide and the sensing pins (Figure 12).
3.17 The tape reader trip lever is not latched due to the energized trip coil, and therefore, the distributor clutch does not disengage. The tape reader trip lever, once again, closes the feed magnet contacts by means of the insulator. The projection moves the distributor clutch stop bail which in turn keeps the distributor clutch trip lever away from the shoe lever, allowing the clutch to continue its rotation.
3.18 Tape feeding will occur at the same time that the sensing pins are withdrawn. As the armature extensions drop down the pawl advances the feed ratchet one tooth (Figure 13). Associated with the feed ratchet are also adetent lever and a blocking pawl.
3.19 The detent lever, with its circular surface engaging the feed ratchet teeth, holds the feed ratchet and the feed wheel in its correct position during sensing (Figure 13).
3.20 The blocking pawl, which rides a post on the feed pawl, is lowered into engagement with a feed ratchet tooth during the feed stroke. This is to prevent excessive overthrow of the feed wheel during feeding, without the use of a heavy detent spring. It also prevents the pulling ahead of the tape, during sensing, by a tape winder, without the use of a heavy detent spring. During the upstroke of the armature extensions, the blocking pawl is rotated out of engagement with the tooth by the post on the feed pawl (Figure 13).
H. Upstop Mechanism
3.21 The armature is provided with a spring biased upstop which serves two purposes.
(a) A portion of the energy during the end of the stroke is stored in a spring and returned to the armature on the downstroke to give a rapid release and acceleration.
(b) A portion of the energy is dissipated through a resilient buffer to minimize noise and metallic clatter (Figure 14).
4. FEATURES
MANUAL READER
A. Freewheeling Mechanism (Figure 15)
4.01 The 33 tape reader is provided with a freewheeling feature which allows the feed wheel to rotate freely. When the control lever is moved to the FREE position, the extension on the control lever engages the blocking pawland pivots it clockwise. Riding in a slot on the underside of the blocking pawl is a stud which connects to the feed pawl. As the blocking pawl is pivoted clockwise by the control lever extension, the blocking pawl moves the feed pawl away from the feed ratchet. With the feed ratchet free, the feed wheel will also rotate freely.
B. Tight-Tape Mechanism (Figure 16)
4.02 This feature consists of a plastic tight-tape bail which snaps into the tape lid. The tight-tape bail serves to turn the tape reader OFF when the moving tape becomes taut. The tight-tape bail has an extension on it which projects through the top plate. This extension rides on a spring biased tight-tape lever. If the tape in the tape reader becomes taut, the bail will be lifted. The bail extension will rotate, causing the tight-tape lever to rotate also. In its pivoting motion the tight-tape lever will lift the tight-tape contact wires away from the contact terminal, breaking the current path. With the circuit broken the tape reader stops.

C. Tape-Out Mechanism (Figure 17)
4.03  The tape reader is equipped with a tape-out feature which will stop the tape reader when the tape runs out. A tape-out pin protrudes above the surface of the top plate. During tape sensing the tape-out pin is kept depressed by the moving tape. When the tape runs out, the spring biased tape-out pin moves fully up. An insulated extension on the tape-out pin lifts the tape-out contact wires away from the contact terminal. This breaks the current path and the tape reader stops.

AUTOMATIC CONTROL FEATURES
4.04 The automatic control features allow the tape reader to be started or stopped either manually or automatically. This is accomplished by means of additional contacts, a relay, and wiring. There are other contacts in the typing unit function area and, for sprocket feed typing units, in the form out mechanism, which are related with the tape reader automatic features.

A. Local Start (Figure 18)
4.05 When the control lever is placed in the MANUAL START position the following events take place:
(a) The start contact wires close momentarily.
(b) After closing momentarily the start contact wires are opened due to the detent action of the control lever.
(c) The momentary closing of the start contact wires energizes the relay and two normally open contacts associated with the relay.
(d) The first relay contact closes a holding circuit.
(e) The second relay contact — if there is tape in the tape reader and the tape-out contact is closed — closes the circuit to the distributor clutch. The distributor clutch will then be tripped as explained in 3.08.

B. Remote Start (Figure 19)
4.06 When the control lever is placed in the AUTO position, the start contact is open and the stop contact is closed. The tape reader will respond to a remote reader start signal and turn ON automatically. The remote signal will close a contact in the typing unit function area and complete an electrical path to the distributor area.

C. Reader Stop
4.07 When the control lever is placed in the MANUAL STOP position, the stop contact wires are momentarily opened, de-energizing the relay and opening two relay contacts. One of these contacts opens the reader trip magnet circuit. The trip magnet de-energizes causing the tape reader to stop.
4.08 The automatic tape reader can be stopped either permanently or temporarily. When the reader is stopped permanently it cannot be started again automatically but must be started manually. When temporarily stopped, the reader can be started again either automatically or manually.
Permanent Stop
4.09 Besides the stopcontact wires mentioned in 4.07, the following are normally closed contacts wired in series with the relay in the power pack:
(a) Tape-out contact wires
(o) Tape reader OFF function box contact
(c) WRU function box contact
When one of these contacts is momentarily opened, the relay is de-energized, opening two relay contacts. One of these relay contacts opens the reader trip magnet circuit. The trip magnet de-energizes causing the reader to stop permanently.
Temporary Stop
4.10 The following normally closed contact wires are wired in series with the reader trip magnet:
(a) Form-out function box contact
(b) Tight-tape contact wires
When one of these contacts is opened the trip magnet is de-energized stopping the tape reader temporarily.

D. FREE Position (Figure 20)
4.11 When the control lever is placed in the FREE position the start and stop contacts are open. The tape reader will not respond to a remote reader start signal.

1. GENERAL
1.01 This section provides lubrication requirements for the 338 tape reader. It reissued to add new lubrication interval requirements for the tape reader. Marginal arrows indicate changes and additions.
1.02 The general lubrication areas are illustrated by photographs. The specific points to receive lubricant are indicated on line drawings with appropriate textual instructions. Line drawings and textual instructions follow each photograph and are keyed to the photograph by paragraph numbers.
1.03 Thoroughly lubricate the tape reader, but avoid over lubrication that might permit the lubricant to drip or be thrown onto adjacent parts. Saturate all felt washers. Initial lubrication of the tape reader should be completed just prior to placing it into service. The lubrication intervals for the tape reader are similar to the lubrication intervals of the set. The lubrication intervals are dictated by the hours of use (including idle time) on a daily. basis. The following charts and notes list the appropriate lubrication intervals.

2. BASIC UNIT
2.01 Tape Reader
CAUTION: DO NOT USE ALCOHOL, MINERAL SPIRITS, OR OTHER SOLVENTS TO CLEAN PLASTIC PARTS OR PARTS WITH PROTECTIVE, DECORATIVE FINISHES. NORMALLY, A SOFT, DRY CLOTH SHOULD BE USED TO REMOVE DUST, OIL, GREASE OR OTHERWISE CLEAN PARTS OR SUBASSEMBLIES. A SOFT CLOTH DAMPENED WITH SOAP OR MILD DETERGENT MAY BE USED. RINSE WITH A SOFT, DAMP CLOTH AND BUFF WITH A SOFT, DRY CLOTH.
1.07 Materials needed for lubrication are listed in Section 570-005-800TC.
1.08 For disassembly and reassembly information, refer to Section. 574-124-702TC.
CAUTION: REMOVE ALL ELECTRICAL POWER FROM UNIT BEFORE LUBRICATING OR DISASSEMBLING COMPONENTS.
At 1500 hour lubrication intervals, apply a coat of thoroughly mixed 50 percent KS7470 oil and 50 percent KS7471 grease.


33 TAPE READER
DISASSEMBLY AND REASSEMBLY
1.01 This section is reissued to incorporate recent engineering changes and to present disassembly and reassembly information exclusively for 33 tape readers. Since this isa general revision, marginal arrows, used to indicate changes, have been omitted.
1.02 References to left, right, front, rear, etc, consider the tape reader to be viewed from a positiqgn where the feed wheel faces up and the lid latch is to the viewer's right.
1.03 Disassembly, as outlined in this section, covers the procedure for removing the principle subassemblies which make up the unit. If further disassembly is required, refer to the appropriate illustrated parts section which shows detailed arrangements of parts. Where it will help in determining location, the numbers of the parts are given in the instructions.
1.04 All tools usedto remove the various assemblies referred to in this section can be found in the standard tool section 570-005-800TC.
1.05 All damaged, worn, or distorted parts should be replaced if encountered in the disassembly and reassembly procedures.

2. DISASSEMBLY AND REASSEMBLY
Note: For information concerning the proper procedure to remove the tape reader and associated cable assemblies from the set, refer to appropriate set disassembly and reassembly section.
SENSING PIN ASSEMBLY
2.01 To remove the sensing pin assembly (Figure 2), proceed as follows.
(a) Remove the two TP151152 mounting screws, TP110743 lockwashers, and TP104807 flat washers which mount the TP183035 sensing pin guide.
(b) Remove sensing pin assembly.
(c) To replace sensing pin assembly, reverse procedure used to remove it.
FEED MAGNET ASSEMBLY
2.02 To remove the feed magnet assembly (Figure 1), proceed as follows.
(a) Remove contact block assembly.
(b) Remove sensing pin assembly.
(c) Unhook the TP90517 detent lever spring from the TP183023 detent bracket.
(d) Unhook the TP114107 blocking pawl spring from the TP183020 blocking pawl bracket.
(e) Remove the TP151152 magnet bracket mounting screw, the TP110743 lock-washer, and the TP104807 washer. Then, remove the two TP181241 magnet bracket mounting screws.
(a) Remove the two push-on TP182726 terminals of the tape reader cable.
(b) Remove the two TP152893 tape reader feed magnet mounting screws, two TP104807 flatwashers, and two TP110743 lockwashers.
(c)} Remove the tape reader feed magnet contact assembly.
(d) To replace the tape reader feed magnet contact assembly, reverse procedure used to remove it.
TAPE READER CLUTCH TRIP MAGNET ASSEMBLY
2.05 To remove tape reader clutch trip magnet assembly (Figure 3), proceed as follows.
(a) Remove the tape reader feed mapnet contact assembly.
(b) Remove plug no. 4 and, with extractor tool TP182697, remove terminals no. ll and 12. :
(c) Loosen the two TP180989 distributor disc mounting Screws and the TP180798 magnet bracket mounting screw.
(d) Remove tape reader clutch trip magnet assembly.
(e) To replace tape reader clutch trip magnet assembly, reverse procedure used to remove it.

TELETYPE CORPORATION  SECTION 574-125-100TC
Skokie, Illinois, U.S.A. Issue 4, June 1974

33 TAPE PUNCH
GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION

1. GENERAL
1.01 This section provides a general description and principles of operation for the 33 tape punch (see Figure 1). It is reissued to consolidate information and make some corrections in the section. Marginal arrows have been used to indicate the changes.
1.02 The 33 tape punch is an 8-level device which perforates paper tape according to ASCII (American National Standard Code for Information Interchange). The tape punch does not receive signals from a transmitting set directly but uses the coded arrangement of the typing unit codebars. The 33 tape punch is a generic title referring to two basic types of punches, a manual and an automatic punch.
1.06 References to left, right, front, or rear, etc, consider the tape punch as viewed by the teletypewriter operator.
1.07. In the illustrations fixed pivots are solid black and floating points, those mounted on parts that move, are cross-hatched.

2. TECHNICAL DATA
Note: This equipment is intended to be operated in a room environment within the temperature range of 40°F to 110°F. Serious damage to it could result if this range is exceeded. In this connection, particular caution should be exercised in using acoustical or other enclosures.
2.04 The 33 tape punch is capable of operating at 60, 66, 75, or 100 words per minute.

3. DETAILED OPERATION
Note: The following paragraphs give a detailed description of the major mechanisms (Figure 3) in the punch. This description applies to the two punches mentioned in 1.02 thru 1.05.
Control features peculiar to each punch will be discussed in Part 4.

DRIVE MECHANISM
3.01 The rocking motion of the typing unit function rocker shaft is imparted to the tape punch by means of a sleeve which connects to a plate with shaft (Figure 4). A drive link, attached to the plate with shaft, connects to a drive post which simultaneously drives the nudger, feed pawl, and stripper bail, and supplies the downward force to pull the selected pawls by means of the sensing lever bail.

INTELLIGENCE TRANSFER MECHANISM
3.02 There is a codebar extension (Figure 5) for each typing unit codebar. Motion is imparted to the codebar extensions by the codebars through the typing unit reset bail. A plate mounted to the tape punchside frame guides the codebar extensions.
3.03 The typing unit selector blocking levers control the mark or space position of the codebars which, in turn, transfer this position to the codebar extensions. A blocked codebar represents a space; an unblocked codebar represents a mark.
3.04 Each codebar extension has a tab on its underside which lines up with its respective sensing lever, pawl, lever, and punch-pin combination.
3.05 During the drive mechanism's counter-clockwise travel, the sensing levers, under spring tension, move up and sense the codebar extensions. Each sensing lever, except the feed lever, has a tab on its top side which lines up with its respective codebar extension.
3.06 When a codebar extension is spacing, the tab, located on its underside, lines up with the tab on the sensing lever. The tabs engage each other, and the sensing lever is blocked from pivoting to its most clockwise position. When a codebar extension is marking, its tab is not in line with the sensing lever tab. As a result the sensing lever pivots to its most clockwise position.
3.07
3.08 The feed sensing lever always travels to its most clockwise position, since it has no tabs. This motion is presented to the pawl, lever, and feed-punch pin combination through a latching surface on the pawl.
3.09 When the tape punch is off, each pawl is in its highest vertical position, each lever in its most counterclockwise position, and<— each code-punch pin in its most downward position — below the surface of the tape.
Transfer Mechanism
3.10 When a sensing lever is in the spacing position, its latching surface is prevented from engaging with its associated pawl latching surface. As a result the pawl is not selected. When a sensing lever is in the marking position, its latching surface engages the latching surface on its associated pawl. When the two latching surfaces engage, the pawl is in the selected position.
3.11
3.12 As the drive mechanism (Figure 4) rotates clockwise, the feed pawl slides along the inclined surface of the adjacent ratchet tooth, drops behind it, and is cammed away from the feed wheel ratchet. Occurring simultaneously, the sensing levers rotate counterclockwise and those which are marking transfer their<— motion to the selected pawl, lever, and codepunch pin combination (see Figure 8). At the Same time, the sensing levers which are spacing are in the nonselected position, and no motion is transferred to them. This results in no perforation of the tape, since the code-punch pins remain in their most downward position below the tape's surface. As the drive mechanism continues and reaches its most clockwise position, the code-punch pin of a selected pawl, lever, and code-punch pin combination travels upwards, perforates a hole in the tape, and continues to its most vertical position. The feed hole is always perforated in the tape since its pawl and lever are always selected.
3.13 Just prior to the end of the drive mechanism's most clockwise travel, the stripper bail, through its bias spring, engages a latching surface located under the spring hook(s) of the selected pawl(s). As the drive mechanism rotates counterclockwise to its stop position, the stripper bail strips the selected pawls from their sensing levers. The selected pawl, lever, and code-punch pin combinations return to their stop positions through their bias springs and the retractor mechanism. The lever bail of the drive mechanism also acts as a part of the retractor mechanism. As the stripper bail strips the pawls, a cam surface on the pawl, which acts as the other member of the retractor mechanism, engages the sensing lever bail post and cams the pawl upwards to the stop position. During this portion of the drive mechanism's travel, the codebar extensions are reset by the codebar reset bail.
3.14 During the drive mechanism's clockwise motion, the nudger (Figure 4) performs its function. Motion is transferred from a cam profile, located on the nudger arm, through a post molded as an integral part of the nudger. The nudger rotates counterclockwise, engages, and nudges the tape gently when the selected code-punch pins are engaged with the tape. This enables the tape to be advanced a small amount without affecting tape feed spacing, since only the weight of the paper between the tape roll is reflected to the feed wheel when the tape is being advanced.
TAPE FEED MECHANISM
3.15 As the stripper bail moves to the rear, the feed pawl engages a tooth on the feed wheel ratchet (Figure 6). When the stripper bail completes its travel to the rear, the feed wheel ratchet has indexed one full tooth and the tape is advanced 0.100 inch by the feed wheel.
TAPE GUIDE MECHANISM
3.16 The tape guide mechanism (Figure 7), consists of a bracket, two rollers, three posts, a sleeve, and a compression spring held together by retainers. A tension spring biases the tape guide mechanism in a clockwise direction. The knurled roller settles against the knurled feed wheel with a predetermined force. It is the combination of force and the knurled wheels that provides adequate tape spacing. The tape guide assembly is shaped in the form of a funnel to provide easy tape threading. A pushbutton (Figure 9), located in the cover lid, when manually pushed down against a tab located on the REL. bracket, disengages the tape guide assembly from the feed wheel, thereby providing easy tape removal from the tape punch.
PUNCH BLOCK MECHANISM
3.17 The punch block mechanism consists of code-punch pins, a feed-punch pin, holder, die plate, and a tape bias spring (Figure 8). The code-punch pin and feed-punch pin are oriented to the die plate through slots which engage levers for their respective code level. The tape bias spring always biases the tape against one edge of the holder. This results in the code hole and feed hole relation to the tape edge to be held constant.
BACKSPACE MECHANISM
3.18 The backspace lever (Figure 6), when depressed manually to its most downward position, backspaces the feed wheel ratchet one tooth space. This results in the tape being backspaced one full character. The backspace lever, through another lever, cams out the feed - pawl during the backspace operation. This isa safety feature to prevent a jam if the operator accidentally operates the backspace mechanism while the tape punch is running.
4. CONTROL FEATURES
MANUAL PUNCH
4.01 The manual punch has four pushbuttons: ON, OFF, B.SP., and REL. (Figure 9), whose functions are:
ON — When the ON pushbutton on the cover is depressed, (Figure 10) the control transfer lever operates a control link which, in turn, rotates the control lever. The control lever has a roller on one end and a detent on the other. The detent engages a drivepost while the roller guides the drive link. When the control lever is rotated in the ON mode, the detent disengages from the drive post while the roller pivots downward. The drive link, under spring tension, is pulled downward to engage the drive post.
When the OFF pushbutton on the cover is depressed, the control transfer lever operates the control link and then the control lever is operated. The detent on the control lever travels downward to engage the drive post while the roller pivots upward, disengaging the drive link from the drive post.
B.SP. — When the B.SP. pushbutton on the cover is depressed, the backspace mechanism, described in 3.18, is operated. The backspace lever, when depressed, moves down to engage a tooth on the back side of the feed wheel ratchet (Figure 11). Simultaneously, a lever pivots the feed pawl away from the feed wheel ratchet which then turns counterclockwise, backspacing one tooth. The feed wheel is mounted on the same shaft as the ratchet. When the ratchet backspaces, the feed wheel also backspaces.
When the REL. pushbutton on the cover is depressed, the entire backspace mechanism (Figure 7) pivots counterclockwise raising the roller away from the feed wheel. The tape can thus be pulled out freely.
AUTOMATIC PUNCH
4.02
The automatic punch has four pushbuttons, similar to the manual punch. The pushbuttons are: ON, OFF, B.SP., and REL.
ON —
OFF —
Depressing the ON pushbutton (Figure 12) on the cover lid causes a lever, link, the lever assembly, and the link with stud to pivot. In its pivoting motion, the stud causes the latch bail to pivot counterclockwise disengaging the ON-OFF bail lever, allowing it to move towards the rear. In this rearward travel the stud, which in the OF F condition holds the feed pawl down away from the feed wheel ratchet, also moves towards the rear allowing the feed pawl to reach upand engagea tooth on the feed wheei ratchet.
When the OFF pushbutton (Figure 12) is depressed, its lever is pivoted away from the engaging surface of the ON lever allowing the spring-biased levers to return to their OFF position. The latch bail pivots upward to engage the ON-OFF bail lever and the stud moves the feed pawl downwardaway from the feed wheel ratchet teeth.
B.SP. — Same as the manual punch backspace operation described in 4.01
REL. — Same as the manual punch release operation described in 4.01
4.03 Automatic ON (Figure 13) — For turning the tape punch ON automatically the same mechanism that turns it ON manually is used. When the "R" and "Control" keytops of the local set or the distant set are depressed, a code combination is set up in the typing unit codebars and codebar extensions. The A-8 sensing lever senses the codebar extensions and travels upwards, positioning a pawl and lever. In its pivoting motion the lever engages an extension of the lever assembly causing it to pivot as described in 4.02. The pivoting action of the lever assembly causes the link with stud to pivot. Subsequently, the latch bail moves downward disengaging the ON-OFF bail whose stud moves away from the feed pawl. The feed pawl then reaches up to engage a tooth on the feed wheel ratchet.
4.04 Automatic OFF (Figure 14) — When the "T" and the "Control" keytops are depressed on the keyboard, the tape punch OFF code combination is set up in the typing unit codebars and codebar extensions. The A-O sensing lever senses the codebar extensions and positions a pawl and lever. The lever has an extension which causes the post of the ON-OFF bail to moveupward. Simultaneously, the stud engages the feed pawl and pulls it down disengaging it from the feed wheel ratchet. The ON-OFF bail lever drops in the engaging surface of the spring biased latch bail. During subsequent cycles, the sensing levers will sense incoming code combinations but the selected pawls will be stripped each time. Likewise, there will be no action of the feed pawl and the tape will not be advanced.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

TELETYPE CORPORATION
Skokie, Illinois, U.S.A.

33 TAPE PUNCH
LUBRICATION
1. GENERAL
1.01 This section provides lubrication requirements for the 33 tape punch.
Note 1: Reduce lubrication interval 15 percent when usage is 6 days per week, 30 percent when usage is 7 days per week.
Note 2: Sets operating at speeds between 60 and 100 wpm use lubrication requirements for the lower of the two speeds.
Note 3: The lubrication intervals are for the set as a whole — all components of the set should be lubricated.
Note 4: Just prior to storage, all equipment should be thoroughly lubricated.
1.05 The textual instructions that accompany the line drawings consist of abbreviated directions, specific lubrication points, and parts affected. The meanings of the abbreviated directions (symbols) are given below.
1.06 References to left, right, front, or rear, etc, consider the tape punch to be viewed from a position where the tape guide
2. BASIC UNIT
2.01 Drive Link Mechanism Area
CAUTION: DO NOT USE ALCOHOL, MINERAL SPIRITS, OR OTHER SOLVENTS TO CLEAN PLASTIC PARTS OR PARTS WITH PROTECTIVE-DECORATIVE FINISHES. NORMALLY, A SOFT, DRY CLOTH SHOULD BE USED TO REMOVE DUST, OIL, GREASE, OR OTHERWISE CLEAN PARTS OR SUBASSEMBLIES. IF NECESSARY, A SOFT CLOTH DAMPENED WITH SOAP OR MILD DETERGENT MAY BE USED. AFTERWARDS, RINSE EACH CLEANED PART OF SUBASSEMBLY WITH A SOFT, DAMP CLOTH AND BUFF WITH A SOFT, DRY CLOTH.
1.07 Tools and materials needed for teletypewriter lubrication are listed in Section 570-005-800TC.
1.08 For disassembly and reassembly information refer to Section 574-125-702TC.

At 1500 hour lubrication intervals, apply a coat of thoroughly mixed 50 percent TKS7470 oil and 50 percent TKS7471 grease.

TELETYPE CORPORATION
Skokie, Illinois U. S. A.
33 TAPE PUNCH
DISASSEMBLY AND REASSEMBLY
1. GENERAL
1.01 This section is reissued to incorporate all recent engineering changes and to present disassembly and reassembly information exclusively for the 33 tape punch. Since this is a general revision, marginal arrows, used to indicate changes, have been omitted.
1.02 References to left, right, front, rear, etc, consider the tape punch to be viewed from a position where tape guide assembly faces up and the backspace lever is to the viewer's left. Orientation references in the drive link mechanism area consider the drive link to be up and located to the viewer's right.
1.03 Disassembly, as outlined in this section, covers the procedure for removing the principle subassemblies which make up the unit. If further disassembly is required, refer to Section 574-125-800TC, which shows detailed arrangementof parts. Where it will help indetermining their location, the numbers of the parts are given in the instructions.
1.04 When self-tapping screws are used to mount mechanisms onto castings, do not remove the self-tapping screws. Merely loosen them enough to remove the mechanisms unless specifically instructed otherwise.
1.05 Retaining rings are made of spring steel and have a tendency to release suddenly. To avoid loss of these rings when removing them, proceed as follows.
(a) Hold retaining ring to prevent its rotating.
(b) Place blade of screwdriver in one of ring's slots and rotate screwdriver to increase diameter.
(c) Ring will come off easily in fingers without flying.
1.06 All tools used to remove the mechanisms referred to in this section can be found in the 570-005-800TC standard tool section. No additional special tools are required.
1.07 All damaged, worn, or distorted parts should be replaced if encountered in the disassembly and reassembly procedures.
2. DISASSEMBLY AND REASSEMBLY
Note: For information concerning the proper procedure to remove the tape punch from the set, refer to the set disassembly and reassembly section, 574-100-702TC.
CAUTION: BEFORE BEGINNING DISASSEMBLY, REMOVE CONNECTORS FROM EXTERNAL RECEPTACLES( POWER SOURCE, DATA SET, ETC).

CHAD CHUTE ASSEMBLY
2.01 To remove the chad chute assembly (Figures 1 and 3), proceed as follows.
(a) Remove the TP182915 extension.
(b) Remove two TP152893 screws, TP110743 lockwashers, and TP2034 flat washers.
(c) Remove the TP182908 chad chute assembly.
(d) To replace the chad chute assembly, reverse the procedure used to remove it. Line up the oblong holes of the plate with the holes in the punch block holder. Apply finger pressure on top of the chad chute assembly towards punch block holder when replacing and tightening the two screws.
Note: Late design units have a TP185891 plastic chad chute assembly that should not be removed.
PUNCH BLOCK ASSEMBLY
A. Early Design
2.02 To remove the punch block assembly (Figure 1), proceed as follows. (a) Remove the two TP153817 mounting screws, TP110743 lockwashers, and T P2034 flat washers.
(b) Slide the punch block assembly forwara until the tongue in the punch block holder and the punch pins disengage the groove in the TP182903 tape punch casting and the TP182813 levers respectively.
(c) To replace the punch block assembly, position the slots in the punch pins so that they face the guide pin. The bottom of the punch pins should be in line and in a position that approximates their position when on the tape punch. Line up the punch pin slots with their levers and reverse the procedure used to remove the punch block assembly.
B. Late Design
2.03 To remove punch block assembly (Figures 3 and 4), proceed as follows.
(a) Remove the three TP153817 screws, TP110743 lockwashers, and TP2034 flat washers.
(b) Slide the punch block assembly forward until the tongue in the punch block holder and the punch pins disengage the groove in the TP182903 tape punch casting and the TP182813 levers respectively.
(c) To replace the punch block assembly, position the slots in the punch pins so that they face the guide pin. The bottom of the punch pins should be in line and in a position that approximates their position when on the tape punch. Line up the punch pin slots with their levers and reverse the procedure used to remove the punch block
(d) Remove the tape guide assembly.
(e) To replace the tape guide assembly, reverse the above procedure making sure that the tension spring is positioned in the markéd notch of the arm. assembly.
PAWL UPSTOP ASSEMBLY
2.05 To remove the pawl upstop assembly TAPE GUIDE ASSEMBLY (Figures 2 and 4), proceed as follows.
2.04 To remove the tape guide assembly (Figures 2 and 4), proceed as follows.
Note: Never disassemble the pawl upstop assembly prior to removing the pawl, lever, and spring combinations. The slotted TP182822 plate keeps the "ball" and "socket" of the lever and pawl in full engagement.
(a) With a pencil or suitable marking instrument, mark the notch where the TP184095 tension spring end is positioned. (a) Remove the TP181244 screw.
(b) Unhook the TP184095 tension spring and (b) Remove the TP182821 post, TP182893 remove the TP182936 arm from the bracket, and TP182822 plate. TP182845 post.
(c) To replace the pawl upstop assembly,
(c) Remove the TP181244 mounting screw reverse the procedure used to remove from the tape guide assembly. it.
2.06 To remove the sensing levers and guideplate assembly (Figures 1 and 4), proceed as follows.
(a) Unhook each TP182909 sensing lever spring and rotate each sensing lever away from the guideplate.
(b) Remove the two TP181244 screws from the TP185847 post and remove the post and the attached sensing levers.
(c) Remove the TP181242 screw and TP3598 nut from the TP182815 guideplate. Remove the guideplate. 
(d) To replace the sensing levers and guideplate, reverse the procedure used to remove them. However, before tightening the TP181242 screw and TP3598 nut, push the guideplate downward to take up all play. Viewing the tape punch from the left, position the guideplate in a horizontal to a slightly counterclockwise from horizontal position as gauged by eye. Then, tighten the TP181242 screw and TP3598 nut.

PAWL, LEVER, AND SPRING COMBINATIONS
2.07 To remove the pawl, lever, and spring combinations (Figure 4), proceed as follows.
(a) Remove chad chute assembly.
(b) Remove punch block assembly.
(c) Remove tape guide assembly.
(d) Remove pawl upstop assembly.
(e) Remove sensing levers and guideplate assembly.
(f) Remove the two TP181244 screws that hold the power bail mechanism in place.
(g) Remove the TP119652 retaining ring that holds the TP182377 pawl to the power bail assembly.
(h) Remove the TP7002 flat washer, the TP124177 lockwasher, and the TP3598 nut from the TP185846 post that supplies the pivot point for the levers.
(i) The pawl, lever, and spring combination and the attached power bailassembly can now be removed from the tape punch.
(i) To replace the pawl, lever, and spring combination, reverse the procedure used to remove it. 


TELETYPE CORPORATION
Skokie, Illinois, U.S.A.

SECTION 574-126-100TC
Issue 2, November 1968
33 COVER
GENERAL DESCRIPTION

1. GENERAL
1.01 This section is reissued to provide a general description of the 33 cover. Information on the 32 cover presented in Issue 1 has been omitted and is covered in Section §74-176-100TC. Also omitted is information on adjustments, disassembly and reassembly, and lubrication which appeared in Issue 1. This information is now covered in the following sections:
Disassembly and Reassembly - 574-100-702TC
Adjustments - §74-126-700TC
Lubrication - §74-126-701TC
Since this is a general revision marginal arrows have been omitted.
1.02 The main function of the cover is to protect the interior components of the set and serveas a decorative finish to the set. The cover also serves as the frame for the dial, lamps, volume control knob, and the paper supply
1.08 References to left, right, front, or rear consider the cover as viewed by the operator.

2. DESCRIPTION
A. Receive-Only (RO) Cover
2.01 The RO cover houses the receiving component of the set. The cover is made entirely of plastic.
2.02 A spring detented lid, when raised, provides access to the ribbon. It also allows the operator to easily insert the paper around the platen. A window permits viewing the copy and provides a cutting edge for tearing paper or forms. The entire cover mounts to the set subbase.
B. Keyboard Send-Receive (KSR) Cover
2.03 The KSR cover illustrated in Figure 1 houses the typing unit, the keyboard, and the call control unit. Like the RO cover, the KSR cover is gray and made of plastic.
2.04 The cover has a raisable lid to provide access to the paper and the ribbon as described in 2.02. In the call control area, the cover has slotsfor the various lamps, as shown in Figure 1, and an opening for the dial. The nameplate attaches to the front of the cover.
C. Automatic Send-Receive (ASR) Cover
2.05 The ASR cover illustrated in Figure 2 is essentially the same as the KSR except that covers for the tape punch and the tape reader are attached.
2.06 When mounted on the set the cover is one integral whole. The tape punch and the tape reader covers are attached to the main cover and remain as part of the. main cover when it is removed. In the particular cover shown in Figure 2, a paper alarm is mounted to the rear of the cover beyond where the paper roll would be mounted. Like the RO and KSR covers, the ASR cover is also gray and plastic.

1. GENERAL
1.01 This section provides lubrication information for the 33 cover formerly covered in Section 574-126-100TC.
1.02 The general lubrication area is shown in the automatic send-receive (ASR) cover photograph. Lubrication requirements are the same for both the keyboard send-receive (KSR) (not illustrated) and the ASRcovers. The specific lubrication points are indicated on a line drawing with appropriate textual instructions keyed to the photograph by paragraph number.
1.03 Provide a thorough coat of lubricant at each designated area. Do not overlubricate to the point where lubricant drops onto adjacent parts.
1.04 Lubricate the cover before placing it into service or prior to storage. After a short period of service, relubricate it to make sure that no areas have been missed. Thereafter, lubricate the cover at regular unit lubrication intervals.
1.05 The textual instructions that accompany the line drawing consist of abbreviated directions, specific lubrication points, and parts affected. The meanings of the abbreviated directions (symbols) are given below:
Symbol Meaning
D Keep dry — no lubricant permitted.
O Oil (KS7470)
CAUTION: DO NOT USE ALCOHOL, MINERAL SPIRITS, OR OTHER SOLVENTS TO CLEAN ANY PLASTIC PARTS OR PARTS WITH PROTECTIVE DECORATIVE FINISHES. NORMALLY, A SOFT, DRY CLOTH SHOULD BE USED TO REMOVE DUST, OIL, GREASE, OR OTHERWISE CLEAN PARTS OR SUBASSEMBLIES. IF NECESSARY, A SOFT DAMP CLOTH WITH SOAP OR A MILD DETERGENT MAY BE USED. AFTERWARDS, RINSE EACH CLEANED PART OR SUBASSEMBLY WITH A SOFT, DAMP CLOTH, AND BUFF WITH A SOFT, DRY CLOTH.
1.06 Tools and materials needed for lubrication are listed in Section 570-005-800TC.
1.07 For disassembly and reassembly information, refer to Section 574-126-702TC.

©1968 by Teletype Corporation
All rights reserved
Printed in U.S.A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

TELETYPE CORPORATION.
5555 TOUHY AVENUE, SKOKIE, ILLINOIS
SEE INDIVIDUAL SECTIONS FOR COPYRIGHT NOTICES. PRINTED IN U.S.A.

310B
Volume 2

INTRODUCTION
Bulletin 310B is atechnical manual that provides general and specific information about the 33 Keyboard Send-Receive (KSR), Receive-Only (RO), and Automatic Send-Receive (ASR) Teletypewriter Sets and their component units. It consists of two volumes.
Volume 1 contains a description of the 33 Teletypewriter Sets and gives installation instructions. Also included in Volume 1 is information on the disassembly and reassembly, lubrication, and principles of operation of the component units of the Teletypewriter Sets. Volume 2 includes adjustment information on all component units of 33 Teletypewriter Sets.
Each volume is made up of a group of appropriate independent sections. Each independent section is complete within itself-—it is separately identified by a title and section number, and the pages are numbered consecutively.
Each individual section is identified by a 9-digit section number which appears at the topof each page of asection. The section number appears on the left corner of left-hand pages and on the right corner of right-hand pages. In addition, the section number on each page contains the suffix TC which identifies it as a Teletype Corporation section. All sections are placed in the technical manual in ascending numerical order.
To locate specific information, refer to the table of contents on the following page. In the first column, under "Equipment," find the name of the component unit or Set in question. Move across the page to the second column and locate the title being sought. The applicable 9-digit section number can then be found in the third column. Turn to Page 1 of the applicable section, and the contents of that section will be found. :
The sections comprising this bulletin are now stocked separately and may be individually ordered if the entire bulletin is not needed.

FILING INSTRUCTIONS
The following filing instructions apply to changes sent to the field. Asterisk (*) in the table of contents indicates changes.
When the issue of a section changes, replace the old issue with the attached new one.
In the case of addendums, turn to the affected section and follow the instructions on the first page of the attached addendum.
Replace the old table of contents with this new one.

1. GENERAL
1.01 This section provides adjustment information for 33 keyboards which are mechanically reset by an H-plate and the distributor trip linkage shown in 2.16 and 2.17.
Note: Adjustment information for solenoid reset keyboards is presented in Section 574-121-703TC..
The section is reissued to include engineering changes and to add alpha-numeric adjustment codes to supplement the adjustment titles. The code consists of the three-letter combination KBA to designate the keyboard and a number to distinguish between the adjustments in this area. Marginal arrows indicate the changes and additions, however the alpha-numeric designations are not arrowed. to the viewer's right.
1.05 When a procedure calls for using pry points or slots to make an adjustment, place a screwdriver between the points or in the slots and pry parts in the proper direction.
1.06 When the keyboard is removed from the subbase to facilitate the making of an adjustment and subsequently replaced, recheck any adjustments that may have been affected. Also, if parts are removed from the keyboard to facilitate the making of an adjustment, be sure that they are subsequently replaced. Recheck any adjustment that may have been affected by the removal of parts.
1.07 Related adjustments are listed with some of the adjustmenttexts and are primarily intended to aid in troubleshooting the equipment. As an example, suppose that in searching for a trouble it is discoveredthat Part (2) of CONTACT WIRES adjustment does not meet its requirement. Under Related Adjustment it is indicated that adjustment KBA-3 is affected by adjustment KBA-2. Check adjustment KBA-2 to See if it is the basic cause of the trouble. Also, note that certain adjustments affect other adjustments. For example, see the DISTRIBUTOR TRIP LINKAGE adjustment (2.16 or 2.17). Note that this adjustment affects the TRIP LEVER ENGAGEMENT adjustment (of Section 574-122-700TC). If the former adjustment is changed, check the latter adjustment.
1.08 The spring tensions specified in this section are indications, not exact values. Therefore, to obtain reliable readings, it is important that spring tensions be measured by spring scales placed in the positions shown on pertinent linedrawings. Springs that do not meet their requirements should be replaced by new ones. Only those springs that directly affect the operation of the keyboard are measured, however, others may be measured indirectly in the process. If, at first, the spring tension requirement cannot be met, replace the indicated spring being directly measured. Then, if the requirement is not met, any springs that are indirectly measured in the procedure should be replaced, one at a time, with the performance of requirement checks each time a spring is replaced.
Note 1: Use only spring scales which are recommended by the manufacturer. These spring scales are listed in Maintenance Tools Section 570-005-800TC.
Note 2: The spring tensions may be checked in any Sequence.
Note 3: The alpha-numeric coding system is not used for spring tensions.
1.09 With the keyboard and typing unit assembled together on the subbase, adjustment procedures may specify that the typing unit be placed in the stop condition. It is in the stop condition when the selector armature is in its attracted (frontward) position and all clutches are disengaged. Furthermore, when the typing unit is in the stop condition the keyboard will be latched --—- universal lever down and blocked from upward movement by an associated latch-lever.
Note: The keyboard is tripped when the universal lever is in its up position.
1.10 To place the typing unit in the stop condition, hold the selector armature in its attracted (frontward) position. Manually rotate the main shaft clockwise (as viewed from the left) until all clutches are in a stop position. Fully disengage all of the clutches by positioning ascrewdriver to the associated stop-lug. Push the clutch disc in the normal direction of main shaft rotation until the corresponding latchlever seats in its clutch disc notch. This permits the clutch shoes to release their tensions on the Clutch drum. With all clutches disengaged, the main shaft will turn freely without any dragging of the clutch shoes.
Note 1: A stop position is that position where a shoe lever contacts a trip lever.
Note 2: The distributor clutch will not disengage unless the keyboard is latched and the answer-back drum is in its home position. The answer-back home position is the position where the control lever is fully detented into the indent on the answer-back drum.
1.11 A clutch is tripped by moving a trip lever up and away from contact with a shoe lever. When moved up, a trip lever no longer holds a shoe lever in its stop position. When the clutch is tripped, the shoe lever and a stop-lug on the clutch disc move apart, and the clutch becomes engaged. The clutch shoes wedge against the drum so that when the shaft is turned the clutch assembly will turn in unison with it.
2. BASIC UNIT
2.01 Universal Link
Note: Remove keyboard and call control unit from subbase to facilitate the making of the following adjustments. For disassembly instructions, refer to Section 574-121-7G62TC.
2.02 Contact Wires
CONTACT WIRES (KBA-2 and KBA-3)
Note: KBA-2 applies to wires actuated by the reset bail (slots B through O). KBA-3 applies to wires with two camming surfaces, operated by a T-lever and the reset bail.
Marking Position (KBA-2)
To Check
Push universal lever down until latched by latchlever. Place T-levers down in marking position. Take up play of contact block in downward direction and release. Take up play of each contact wire in upward direction and release.
Requirement
Min 0.012 inch---Max 0.027 inch between the no. 1 contact wire (first reset-bail actuated contact wire from front of keyboard) and its associated terminal.
Min 0.018 inch-~-Max 0.032 inch between remaining marking contact wires and their associated terminals.
To Adjust
Bend contact wire with TP185829 bending tool.
Note: Contact bounce is not permissible during distributor readout of the nos. 1 through 8 code bits. If necessary, the no. 1 contact gap should be refined to the low end of its adjustment range to eliminate bounce.
Spacing Position (KBA-3)
To Check
Push universal lever down until latched by latchlever. Place T-levers up in spacing position. Trip keyboard by depressing universal codebar. Take up play of T-levers against universal lever and release. Take up play of contact block in downward direction and release. Take up play of each contact wire in upward direction and release.
Requirement
Min 0. 020 inch---Max 0.040 inch between terminal and each contact wire previously adjusted in KBA-2. To Adjust
Bend contact wire with TP185829 bending tool as shown.
Related Adjustment
Affected by
Adjustment KBA-3 is affected by adjustment KBA-2.
Note 1: This adjustment applies only to parity keyboards equipped with a TP180076 T-lever at right side of SHIFT codebar mechanism.
Note 2: Contact wires on auxiliary contact block on left side of parity keyboards are designated A, B, C, and D from rear to front.
(1) To Check
(2) To Adjust Bend contact wire(s) using TP185829 bending tool.
Push universal lever down, until latched by latchlever. Trip keyboard by depressing universal codebar. Insert a 0.090 inch gauge diagonally into third keylever (SHIFT) slot in frame from left. Depress left SHIFT keylever until it bottoms on top of gauge.
Requirement
(a) Min some clearance between D contact wire and camming surface of its associated T-lever.
Min 0. 020 inch---Max 0.055 inch between C contact wire and SHIFT terminal. To Check
Push universal lever down until latched by latchlever. Hold right SHIFT keylever fully depressed. Trip keyboard by depressing universal codebar. Release SHIFT keylever. Lightly take up play in contact block towards right. (b)
Requirement
(a) Min 0. 004 inch between C contact wire and camming surface of SHIFT T-lever with all contact block play lightly taken up toward right.
2. 04 Contact Wires (continued)
"CTRL" CONTACT WIRE (KBA-5)
Note 1: This adjustment applies only to parity keyboards equipped with TP185780 CTRL keylever spring but without TP186049 blocking lever and TP186051 tie link.
Note 2: Contact wires on auxiliary contact block on left side of parity keyboards are designated A, B, C, and D from rear to front.
(1) To Check
With the CTRL keytop unoperated, lightly take up play in contact block towards left to make clearance between the B contact wire and CTRL terminal a minimum. Check Requirement (a). Lightly take up play in contact block towards right to make clearance between B contact wire and CTRL terminal a maximum. Check Requirement (b).
(2) To Check
Fully depress the CTRL keytop and hold it depressed. Lightly take up play in contact block towards left to make clearance between the A contact wire and CTRL terminal a minimum. Check Requirement (c). Lightly take up play in contact block towards right to make clearance between A contact wire and CTRL terminal a maximum. Check Requirement (qd).


TELETYPE CORPORATION
Skokie, Illinois, U.S.A.
33 TYPING UNIT
ADJUSTMENTS

1. GENERAL
1.01 This section provides adjustment information for the 33 typing unit. It is reissued to include the latest engineering changes. Marginal arrows indicate the changes and additions.
1.02 In the adjustments covered in this section, location of clearances, position of parts, and point and angle of scale applications are illustrated by line drawings. Requirements and procedures are set forth in the several texts that accompany the line drawings. Required tools are included in TP185830 maintenance tool kit and are listed in Section 570-005-800TC. A DXD800 Signal Distortion Test Set was used to determine the requirements for the selector receiving margins.
1.03 Adjustments are divided into two categories — basic and variations. Basic adjustments apply to all friction feed and/or sprocket feed typing units. Adjustments found under variations apply only totyping units which have the particular feature(s) under consideration. The F and S following an adjustment title mean that the adjustment applies only to friction feed (F) or sprocket feed:(S) typing units. No letter designation indicates that the adjustment applies to both types of equipment.
1.04 Adjustments are presented in a definite order which is considered the best to follow when completely readjusting the equipment. Certain interrelated adjustments, which appear on the same page, should be checked and adjusted in a definite sequence. The sequence is indicated by the letters (A), (B), etc. No single adjustment should be undertaken without first completely understanding the procedure and knowing the requirements. Therefore, read a procedure all the way through before making an adjustment or checking a spring tension.
Note: Disconnect the typing unit from any ac or dc potential prior to inspection, minor repair, extensive maintenance, or a complete readjustment.
1.05 References to left, right, front, rear, etc consider the typing unit to be viewed from a position where the carriage area faces up and the selector area is located to the viewer's left.
1.06 Unless specifically stated otherwise, make screws or nuts friction tight to make an adjustment and tighten them securely once the adjustment has been made.
1.07 When a procedure calls for using pry points or slots to make an adjustment, place a screwdriver between the points or in the slots and pry parts in the proper direction.
1.08 When a requirement calls for a range which includes the word "some", this limit of the range should be considered as any finite amount greater than content but not exceeding the other limit of the requirement.
1.09 Due to a high degree of congestion within certain areas of some typing units, some disassembly will be required prior to making certain adjustments. If parts or subassemblies are removed from the typing unit to facilitate the making of an adjustment, be sure that they are subsequently replaced. Recheck any adjustments that may have been affected by the removal of parts or subassemblies.
Note 1: Do not remove parts and/or subassemblies unless it is considered absolutely necessary to perform an adjustment.
Note 2: Instructions for the disassembly and reassembly of parts and/or subassemblies are given in the appropriate disassembly and reassembly section and/or appropriate illustrated parts section.
Note 3: Do not lift typing unit while holding any any part of the selector mechanism. Excessive strain on the selector mechanism, due to the weight of the typing unit, may cause selector malfunctioning. See appropriate disassembly and reassembly section for the proper method of lifting typing unit from its subbase.
1.10 Related adjustments are listed with some of the adjustment texts and are primarily intended to aid introubleshooting the equipment. As an example, suppose that in searching for a trouble it is discovered that the FUNCTION CLUTCH POSITION adjustment does not meet its requirement. Under Related Adjustments it is indicated that this adjustment is affected by the LEFT BEARING POSITION adjustment. First, check it to see if it is the cause of the trouble. Also, it is indicated that the FUNCTION CLUTCH POSITION adjustment affects FUNCTION CLUTCH ENDPLAY, CODEBAR CLUTCH ENDPLAY, and CODEBAR CLUTCH TRIP LEVER LINE-UP adjustments. If the former adjustment is changed, check the latter adjustments.
Note: Information in parentheses () following any related adjustment gives the associated paragraph number and area, if different from the paragraph number at the top of the page.
1.11 The spring tensions specified in this section are indications, not exact values. Therefore, to obtain reliable readings, it is important that spring tensions be measured by spring scales placed in the positions shown on pertinent line drawings. Springs that do not meet their requirements should be replaced by new ones. Only those springs that directly affect the operation of the typing unit are measured, however, others may be measured indirectly in the process. If, at first, the spring tension requirement cannot be met, replace the indicated spring being directly measured. Then if the requirement is not met, any springs that are indirectly measured in the procedure should be replaced, one at a time, with the performance of requirement checks each time a spring is replaced.
Note 1: Use only spring scales which are recommended by the manufacturer and found in Maintenance Tools Section 570-005-800TC.
Note 2: The spring tensions may be checked in any sequence.
Note 3: The alpha-numeric coding system is not used for spring tensions.
1.12 All adjustment. procedures should be started with the typing unit in the stop condition. In the stop condition, the selector armature is in its attracted (frontward) position and all clutches are disengaged and latched. To place the typing unit in the stop condition, use TP185832 armature clip to hold the selector armature in its attracted (frontward) position. Rotate the main shaft clockwise (as viewed from the left) until all clutches are in a stop position. Fully disengage all of the clutches as instructed in 1.13 following.
Note 1: A stop position is that position where a shoe lever contacts a trip lever.
Note 2: The distributor clutch will not disengage if the typing unit is removed from a set unless the keyboard adjusting bracket is adjusted per 3.17. Adjustment must be remade to set requirements when the typing unit is replaced in an ASR or KSR set.
Note 3: The distributor clutch will not disengage unless the answer-back drum is in its. home position, which is the position where the control lever is fully detented into the indent on the answer-back drum.
1.13 When disengaged, a clutch is latched so that a shoe lever is held in its stop position by a trip lever while a corresponding latchlever is seated inanotchof the clutch disc. This allows the clutch shoes to release their tension on the clutch drum. With all clutches disengaged, the main shaft will turn freely without any clutch shoes dragging.
Note: If the shaft is turned by hand, a clutch will not fully disengage upon reaching a stop position. Where an adjustment procedure calls for disengagement, rotate the clutch to a stop position, apply a screwdriver to the associated stop-lug, and push the clutch disc in the normal direction of main shaft rotation until the corresponding latchlever seats in its clutch disc notch. As a reminder, the word "latched" follows instructions to disengage the clutches.
1.14 A clutch is engaged when a trip lever is moved up so that it no longer holds a shoe lever in its stop position. When this action occurs, the shoe lever and a stop-lug on the clutch disc move apart, and the clutch shoes wedge against the drum, so that when the shaft is turned, the clutch will turn in unison with it.
1.15 Manual Operation: To manually operate the typing unit, place it in the stop condition as instructed in 1.12 and 1.13. Momentarily permit the armature to move toits unattracted (rearward) position to trip the selector clutch. Slowly rotate the main shaft clockwise (as viewed from the left) until all push levers have moved under their respective selector levers. Using a spring hook, strip the push levers from under the selector levers corresponding to the spacing elements of the code combination to be set up. Then continue to rotate the main shaft until the proper condition is set up or the character is cleared through the typing unit.
1.16 The selector levers are numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 6, and 8 from left to right. To set up the character Y, for example, whose 8-level code combination is 1--45-78, strip the pushlevers from the 2, 3, and 6 selector levers.
1.17 Code combinations within this section are not always given as parity codes. Parity codes are obtained by proper transformation of the eighth code level as explained in the typing unit principles of operation section.
1.18 To aid in physically locating the adjustments and spring tensions, the typing unit is divided into eleven areas. These areas are indicated in Figures 1 through 4 as follows:
1.20 To facilitate making the adjustments, remove the typing unit from the subbase. For instructions, see the appropriate disassembly and reassembly section.
1.21 In some of the adjustment routines, the requirements must be checked at specific points in the operating cycle. With the codebar clutch tripped, the main shaft is rotated to the desired position. Three positions are designated as follows:
Note: Late design units have indicator marks on the function cam and carriage drive link to help locate these positions. For units so equipped, the indicator positions are given in parentheses.
Position 1 — The main shaft is rotated until the function bail is in its uppermost position. (In late design printers, the indicator mark on the carriage drive link is centered within the first notch on the function cam, and the hole on the cam is down. )
Position 2 — The main shaft is rotated until the carriage drive bail is in its rearmost position. (In late design printers, the indicator mark on the carriage drive link is centered within the second notch on the function cam, and the hole on the cam is toward the rear.)

2. BASIC UNIT
2.01 Motor Area
GEAR BACKLASH (MRA-1)
To Check
Find position of tightest pinion and intermediate gear engagement. Hold intermediate gear stationary. Observe fan rim radial motion.
Requirement
For 2-1/2 inch diameter fan: Position 3 — The mainshaft is rotated until the function bail is in its lowermost position. (The indicator mark on the carriage drive link is centered within the third notch on the function cam, and the hole on the cam is up.)
To Adjust
Loosen mounting screws and position motor gear bracket. Tighten screws.
2.02 Motor Area (continued)
BELT TENSION (MRA-2)
To Check
Rotate fan clockwise (viewed from left) until upper level of motor belt becomes taut. Using a spring scale, apply 16 oz force at center of belt.
Requirement
Min 0. 100 inch---Max 0. 135 inch deflection at center of motor belt.
To Adjust
Loosen four clamp screws and rotate motor in cradle. Tighten clamp screws.
Related Adjustments
Affected By
GEAR BACKLASH (2. 01)
Requirement
With distributor clutch disengaged and latched, and clutch gear assembly held to the right, Min some---Max 0.012 inch between left bearing and clutch gear assembly as gauged by eye.
To Adjust
Disengage (latch) distributor clutch. Hold clutch gear assembly firmly to right. Position left bearing to meet requirement with clamp screws loosened. Tighten left bearing clamp Screws.
Related Adjustments
Affected By
BRUSH HOLDER GAP (2.03)
(1) Requirement
With brush holder pointer aligned with the locating mark on the disc Min 0.010 inch---Max 0.060 inch between brush holder pointer and disc.
Requirement
During entire brush holder rotation min 0.002 inch between any brush holder and disc.
(2) To Adjust
With three bearing clamp screws loosened, position distributor shaft assembly and right bearing right or left to meet requirement. Tighten right, but not left, bearing clamp screw.
Related Adjustments
Affects
2.04 Distributor Area (continued)
TRIP SHAFT POSITION (DBA-3)
To Check a CONTROL LEVER
Place distributor clutch in the stop position.
(1) Requirement
With play taken up to minimize all clearances, the trip lever should engage min two-thirds width of formed end of shoe lever.
(2) Requirement
Rear extension of control lever should not bind in its slot in answer-back block.
To Adjust
Loosen clamp screw and post friction tight, Move trip shaft right or left to meet requirements and bias trip shaft towards the front. Tighten clamp screw and post.
Related Adjustments
Affects
FEED PAWL POSITION (3. 06)
Affected By
BRUSH HOLDER GAP (2. 03) ANSWER-BACK
BLOCK
2.05 Distributor Area (continued)
CLUTCH SHOE LEVER GAP (DBA-4)
To Check
Place distributor clutch in stop position (in late design units, position reference mark on sprocket insert on top and vertically in line with distributor shaft). With distributor clutch disengaged and latched, measure and record clearance between shoe lever and stop-lug. Trip distributor clutch by moving trip lever rearward. Fully seat the clutch shoes by applying 32 +1/2 ounces of pressure against the shoe lever along its normal path of forward travel. Measure and record same clearance as above.
(1) Requirement
With distributor clutch disengaged (latched)
Min 0.015 inch between stop-lug and shoe lever.
(2) Requirement
Clearance between stop-lug and shoe lever
Min 0.050 inch---Max 0.080 inch greater when distributor clutch is engaged than when disengaged.
To Adjust
Remove answer-back drum. With clamp screw friction tight, position trip lever using pry point. Tighten clamp screw. Replace answer-back drum.
Note 2: Do not lift typing unit while holding any part of the selector mechanism. Note the proper method for lifting the typing unit. This method is described in the appropriate disassembly and reassembly section.
Note 1: The answer-back control lever and reader trip lever should not be touching their respective stop bail adjusting tabs when checking this adjustment.
Note 2: Perform (1) To Check only on late design units containing the TP182262 trip lever.
(1) To Check
Disengage (latch) distributor clutch. Depress any nonfunction kKeytop to unlatch distributor clutch. If necessary, loosen screw and position bracket to obtain clearance between bracket and trip lever. Tighten screw. Rotate clutch to align upper edges of shoe lever and trip lever.
2.10 Main Shaft Area
Note: If a complete readjustment of the typing unit is to be performed, loosen all screws on main shaft except collar screw immediately to the right of the left main shaft bearing.
(A) LEFT BEARING POSITION (MSA-1) Related Adjustments
Affects
Requirement
The start cam follower, selector levers, and POSITION (2.39) spacing locklever should fully engage their DRIVEN GEAR LINE-UP (2. 12) cams when cam sleeve is in contact with the CODEBAR CLUTCH TRIP LEVER left bearing, and the left side of the left LINE-UP (2. 13) bearing should protrude beyond selector side plate.
To Check
Print two or more characters such as RH at left margin and at center of line.
Requirement.
Character to character spacing approximately same at center of line as at left margin. :
To Adjust
With spacing ratchet clamp screws friction tight, seat piston firmly in the dashpot. Rotate the carriage return arm counterclockwise to permit the feed pawl and check pawl to move toward the spacing ratchet. Position the spacing ratchet so that the check pawl rests on top of a spacing ratchet tooth. Tighten spacing ratchet clamp screws. Recheck requirement and refine adjustment if necessary.
Related Adjustments
Affects
FEED PAWL TRAVEL (2. 67)
RIGHT MARGIN POSITION (2.117)
Affected By
SPACING BELT TENSION (2.66)
LEFT MARGIN POSITION - S
(Platen Area) (2.117)
LEFT MARGIN POSITION - F
(Platen Area) (2.71) —

ABBREVIATION KEY TO ABBREVIATION
ACK Acknowledge
CR Carriage Return
LF Line Feed
RO Rub Out
SP Space
SUP Character Suppression
(a) Example 1:
SUP CR LF RO
TELETYPE SP NILES CR LF ACK
Company City
Station Identification (Maximum - 14 characters)
Note: In this system, the ACK character code combination must be the final significant character code combination in the coded answer-back message.
(b) Example 2:
SUP CR LF RO
ERIE SP BOST CR LF ACK SUP SUP SUP SUP SUP
Company' City
Station Identification (Less than maximum number of characters)
Note: If the station identification is less than the maximum of 14 characters in length, then the remaining rows on the answer-back drum must be coded with the character suppression code according to Example 2 above.
(j) To replace the answer-back drum, place the TP180854 brace in its detented open position, and lift feed pawl (do not overextend its spring). Replace drum with its shaft firmly seated in the contact block slots. Release feed pawl and TP180854 brace. Rotate answer-back drum to assure proper seating of its associated parts. Check that the contact wires are located in their proper slots.
Note 1: Blank spaces in the ASCII (American National Standard Code for Information Interchange) columns indicate no change from the latest edition of the code.
Note 2: Codes shown are for even parity operation. For nonparity operation, remove the eighth level tine.
Note 3: Tines present on the drum represent spacing bits. Tines removed from the drum represent marking bits.
1.02 In the adjustments covered in this section, location of clearances, position of parts, and point and angle of scale applications are illustrated by line drawings. Tools required to perform adjustments arecontained in TP185830 Tool Kit and are listed in Maintenance Tool Section 570-005-800TC.
Note: An adjustment must be performed even if the accompanying illustration is not an exact duplication of the adjustment area.
1.03 The Sequence in which the adjustments appear should be followed when a complete readjustment of the tape reader is undertaken. No adjustment should be undertaken without completely understanding the procedure and the requirements. Read a procedure all the way through before making an adjustment or checking a spring tension.
Note 1: Be sure to check all related adjustments (1.07).
Note 2: Remove all electric power before checking or performing adjustments.
1.04 References to left, right, front, rear, etc consider the tape reader to be viewed from a position where the feed wheel faces up and the lid latch is located to the viewer's right. Orientation references to the clutch trip area consider the armature extension to be facing up with the contact bracket pry points located to the viewer's right.
1.05 When a procedure calls for using pry points or slots to make an adjustment, place a screwdriver between the points or in the slots and pry parts in the proper direction.
1.06 Ifparts are removed from the tape reader to facilitate making an adjustment, be sure that they are replaced.
Note: Recheck any adjustment that may have been affected by the removal of parts.
1.07 Related adjustments are listed with some of the adjustment text and are primarily intended to aid in troubleshooting the equipment. As an example, suppose that in searching for a trouble it is discovered that the BLOCKING PAWL (Tape Reader Area) adjustment does not meet its requirement. Under "Related Adjustment, " it is indicated that this adjustment is affected by the DETENT LEVER (Tape Reader Area) and FEED PAWL (Tape Reader Area) adjustments. Check these to see if either is the cause of the trouble. Also, note that certain adjustments affect other adjustments. For example, see the DETENT LEVER (Tape Reader Area) adjustment. Note that this adjustment affects the FEED PAWL (Tape Reader Area) and BLOCKING PAWL (Tape Reader Area) adjustments. If the former adjustment is changed, check the latter adjustments.
1.08 The spring tensions specified in this section are indications, not exact values. Therefore, to obtain reliable readings, it is important that spring tensions be measured by spring scales placed in the positions shown on pertinent linedrawings. Springs that do not meet their requirements should be replaced by new ones. Only those springs that directly affect the operation of the tape reader.are measured, however, others may be measured indirectly in the process. If this is the case and the requirement is not met, replace the springs one at a time, starting with the indicated spring, until the requirement is satisfied.
Note 1: Use spring scales which are listed in the Maintenance Tool Section 570-005-800TC.
Note 2: Spring tensions may be checked in any sequence.
Note 3: The alpha-numeric coding system is not used for spring tensions.
1.09 Certain adjustments specify that an armature is to be in its attracted position prior tochecking arequirement. This refers to an armature's position when it is magnetically attracted to its magnet core. If a separate power supply is not available, the armature can be held attracted by utilizing power normally supplied by the ASR set. This is accomplished with the motor power turned off and the reader trip magnet armature manually energized.
CAUTION: THE TAPE READER FEED MAGNET OPERATES UNDER HIGH VOLTAGE. PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES SHOULD BE TAKEN WHENEVER POWER TO THE TAPE READER IS TURNED ON. HIGH VOLTAGE WILL CONTINUE UNTIL APPROXIMATELY 10 SECONDS AFTER THE POWER PACK HAS BEEN DISCONNECTED.
1.10 When inserting a tape that has originated from the tape punch, into a tape reader, allow some slack in the tape between the punch and the reader. This is done toclose the reader tape lid.
Note: Do not place the control lever directly into the FREE position while the tape reader is operating under power. Place the control lever into the STOP position and wait until after the tape reader has stopped before moving it beyond the STOP position and into the FREE position. The FREE position of the control lever is used to facilitate the insertion and/or removal of paper tape from the tape reader.
1.11 All adjustments in the "Clutch Trip Area" should be started with the typing unit in the stop condition. It is in the stop condition when the selector armature is in its attracted (frontward) position and all clutches are disengaged.
1.12  Toplace the typing unit in the stop condition, hold the selector armature in its attracted (frontward) position. Rotate the main shaft clockwise (as viewed from the left) until all clutches are fully disengaged as instructed in 1.13 below.
1.13 When disengaged, a clutch is latched so that a shoe lever is held in its stop position by a trip lever while a corresponding latch-lever is seatedin a notchof the clutchdisc. This allows the clutch shoes torelease their tensions on the clutchdrum. With all clutches disengaged, the main shaft will turnfreely withoutany clutch shoes dragging.
Note 1: The clutch stop position is that position where a shoe lever contacts a trip lever.
Note 2: If the shaft is turned by hand, a clutch will not fully disengage upon reaching a stop position. Where anadjustment procedure requires disengagement, rotate the clutch to a stop position, apply a screwdriver to the associated stop-lug, and push the clutch disc in the normal direction of main shaft rotation until the corresponding latchlever seats in its clutch disc notch.
Note 3: The distributor clutch will not disengage unless the answer-back drum is in its home position, which is the position where the control lever is fully detented into the indent on the answer-back drum.
1.14 There are two areas in which tape reader adjustments and spring tensions are found. As aids in locating the areas, Figures 1 and 2 are provided. They indicate the areas as follows:
Area Figure
Clutch trip 2
Tape reader 1
2. BASIC UNIT
2.01 Clutch Trip Area
Note: The following positioning of the trip magnet must be correct before proceeding with the adjustments in the reader.
MAGNET CORE
Requirement
Magnet core slot to be perpendicular to
magnet bracket pivot surface as gauged
by eye. CLUTCH TRIP
MAGNET CORE COIL
To Adjust SLOT
With clutch trip coil mounting screw loosened,
position clutch trip coil. Tighten screw.



TELETYPE CORPORATION
Skokie, Illinois, U.S.A.
33 TAPE PUNCH
ADJUSTMENTS
Note: Remove all electrical power sources from unit before checking or performing any adjustments.
1.05 References to left, right, front, or rear, etc, consider the tape punch to be viewed from a position where the tape guide assembly faces up and the backspace lever is located to the viewer's left.
1.06 When a procedure calls for using pry points or slots to make an adjustment, place ascrewdriver between the points or in the slots and pry parts in the proper direction.
1.07 If the tape punch is removed from the typing unit to facilitate making an adjustment and then replaced, recheck any adjustment that may have been affected. Also, if parts are removed from the tape punch to facilitate making an adjustment, be sure that they are replaced. Recheck any adjustment that may have been affected by the removal of the parts.
1.08 The spring tensions specified in this section are indications, not exact values. Therefore, toobtain reliable readings, it is important that spring tensions be measured by spring scales placed in the positions shown on pertinent line drawings. Springs that do not meet their requirements should be replaced by new ones. Only springs that directly affect the operation of the tape punch are measured, however, others may be measured indirectly in the process. If this is the case and the requirement is not met, replace the springs one at a time, starting with the indicated spring, until the requirement is satisfied.
Note 1: Use spring scales which are listed in the Maintenance Tools Section 570-005-800TC.
Note 2: Spring tensions may be checked in any sequence.
Note 3: The alpha-numeric coding system is not used for spring tensions.
1.09 Certain adjustments require that the tape punch be either "on" or "off." These conditions can be identified as follows:
(a) "Off" condition
(1) Manual (Punch) Controls: A tape punch is "off" when the control lever is in its clockwise detented position and fully engages the drive post.
(2) Automatic (Punch) Controls: An "automatic" tape punch is "off" when the associated typing unit is in the stop condition and the on-off bail assembly is latched by the latch bail.
Note 1: If the automatic punch is equipped with the "On Lock" option, the "unlock" button must be depressed to enable the on-off bail assembly to be latched.
Note 2: If the automatic punch is equipped with the interlock mechanism, the nonprint codebar must be in its unoperated position — solenoid not energized.
(b) "On" condition
(1) Manual (Punch) Controls: A tape punch is "on" when the control lever is detented in its counterclockwise position and the drive post is fully engaged by the drive link.
(2) Automatic (Punch) Controls: An automatic tape punch is "on" when the on-off bail assembly is in its unlatched counterclockwise position.
1.10 With the tape punch and typing unit assembled together, all adjusting procedures should be started with the typing unit in the stop condition. It is in the stop condition when the selector armature is in its attracted (frontward) position and all clutches are disengaged.
Note: When the typing unit is in the stop condition and the punch is "on," the tape punch is said to be in the stop position.
1.11 To place the typing unit in the stop condition, hold the selector armature in its attracted (frontward) position. Rotate the main shaft clockwise (as viewed from the left) until all clutches are fully disengaged as instructed in 1.12.
1.12 When disengaged, a clutch is latched so that a shoe lever is heldin its stop position by a trip lever while acorresponding latch-lever is seated in a notch of the clutch disc. This allows the clutch shoes to release their tension on the clutch drum. With all clutches disengaged, the main shaft will turn freely without any clutch shoes dragging.
Note 1: The clutch stop position is that position where a shoe lever contacts a trip lever.
Note 2: If the shaft is turned by hand, a clutch will not fully disengage upon reaching a stop position. To fully disengage a clutch, rotate the clutch to a stop position, apply a screwdriver to the associated stop-lug, and push the clutch disc in the normal direction of main shaft rotation until the corresponding latchlever seats in its clutch disc notch.
Note 3: The distributor clutch will not disengage unless the answer-back drum is in its home position, which is the position where the control lever is fully detented into the indent on the answer-back drum.
1.13 Manual Operation: To manually operate the typing unit, place it in the stop condition as instructed in 1.11. Momentarily permit the armature to move to its unattracted (rearward) position to trip the selector clutch. Slowly rotate the main shaft clockwise (as viewed from the left) until all pushlevers have moved under their respective selector levers. Using a spring hook, strip the pushlevers from under the selector levers corresponding to the spacing elements of the code combination to be set up. Then continue to rotate the main shaft until the proper condition is set up or the character is cleared through the typing unit.
1.14 The selector levers are numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 6, and 8 from left to right. To set up the character Y, for example, whose code combination is 1--45-78, strip the push-levers from the 2, 3, and 6, selector levers.
1.15 The relationship between code levels, sensing levers, and codebar extensions is illustrated in Figure 2.
1.16 In some adjustment routines, the requirements must be checked at specific points in the operating cycle. With the clutch tripped (1.13), the main shaft is rotated to the required position. Two positions are specified in adjustments of this section:
Note: Late design typing units have indicator marks on the function cam and carriage drive link to help locate their positions. For units so equipped, the indicator positions are given in parentheses.
Position 1 — The main shaft is rotated until the function bail is in its uppermost position. (In late design printers, the indicator mark on the carriage drive link is centered within the first notch on the function cam, and the hole on the cam is down. )
Position 3 — The main shaft is rotated until the function bail is in its lowermost position. (The indicator mark on the carriage drive link is centered within the third notch in the function cam, and the hole on the cam is up.)
Note: The function cam is notched for a "Position 2", but this position is not required in the adjustment of the punch.
2. BASIC UNIT
2.01 Tape Punch Area
Note 1: These adjustments are to be made only if these areas have been disturbed during disassembly.
Note 2: Prior to making adjustments, remove the chad extension. Reassemble when the adjustments are completed.
PAWL UPSTOP ASSEMBLY — PRELIMINARY (PFA-1)

1. GENERAL
1.01 This section provides adjustment information for the 33 typing unit, tape punch, and reader covers. The requirements apply to covers for both Keyboard Send-Receive (KSR) and Automatic Send-Receive (ASR) Sets (Figures 1 and 2). This section is reissued to provide alphanumeric adjustment codes to the adjustment titles. The code consists of a three-letter combination to designate the area, and a number to distinguish between adjustments in that area.
CAUTION: ELECTRICAL POWER MUST BE REMOVED FROM UNIT BEFORE ANY ADJUSTMENTS ARE MADE.
1.03 In the adjustments covered in this section, location of clearances and position of parts are illustrated by line drawings. Requirements and procedures are set forth in the texts that accompany the line drawings.
1.04 Reference to left, right, front, or rear, etc, consider the cover tobe viewed from a position where the lid is up and the nameplate position is facing the viewer.
1.05 Unless specifically stated otherwise, position screws or nuts friction tight to make an adjustment, and tighten them securely once the adjustment has been made.
1.06 Tools needed to perform adjustments are included in TP185830 maintenance tool kit and are listed in Section 570-005-800.
1.07 Check appropriate disassembly and reassembly section for approved procedure of cover and parts removal.

2. BASIC UNIT
2.01 Paper Area
Note 1: The following adjustment applies only to typing units with TP181441 switch mounted on the base casting next to the left function shaft clamp.
LOW-PAPER CONTACT OPERATING ARM (MIA-3)
(1) Requirement (Preliminary)
With paper spindle in place Min 1/16 inch---Max 3/16 inch between operating arm and spindle.
To Adjust
Bend the wire operating arm.
(2) Requirement (Final)
Switch will operate when predetermined low paper supply is reached.
To Adjust
If switch operates when diameter of paper supply roll is too large, bend arm Closer to roll. If switch operates when paper supply is too low, bend arm away from roll.
Note 2: The operating arm should pass through the cover slot, free from any contact with the cover.
To Adjust
With four adjusting screws and locking screw (L) loosened and mounting bracket lying flat on tape reader base, position tape reader. Run two adjusting screws (X) up until requirement is approximately met. Tighten locking screw friction tight. Run two adjusting screws (Y) up until requirement is approximately met. Refine all four adjusting screws, loosen locking screw if necessary. Tighten locking screw after the tape reader has stopped before moving it beyond the STOP position and into the FREE position. The FREE position of the control lever is used to facilitate the insertion and/or removal of paper tape from the tape reader.
1.11 All adjustments in the "Clutch Trip Area" should be started with the typing unit in the stop condition. It is in the stop condition when the selector armature is in its attracted (frontward) position and all clutches are disengaged.
1.12  Toplace the typing unit in the stop condition, hold the selector armature in its attracted (frontward) position. Rotate the main shaft clockwise (as viewed from the left) until all clutches are fully disengaged as instructed in 1. 13 below.
1.13 When disengaged, a clutch is latched so that a shoe lever is held in its stop position by a trip lever while a corresponding latchlever is seated in a notchof the clutch disc. This allows the clutch shoes to release their tensions on the clutchdrum. With all clutches disengaged, the main shaft will turnfreely without any clutch shoes dragging.
Note 1: The clutch stop position is that position where a shoe lever contacts a trip lever.
Note 2: If the shaft is turned by hand, a clutch will not fully disengage upon reaching a stop position. Where anadjustment procedure requires disengagement, rotate the clutch to a stop position, apply a screwdriver to the associated stop-lug, and push the clutch disc in the normal direction of main shaft rotation until the corresponding latchlever seats in its clutch disc notch.
Note 3: The distributor clutch will not disengage unless the answer-back drum is in its home position, which is the position where the control lever is fully detented into the indent on the answer-back drum.
1.14 There are two areas inwhich tape reader adjustments and spring tensions are found. As aids in locating the areas, Figures 1 and 2 are provided. They indicate the areas as follows:
Area Figure
Clutch trip 2
Tape reader 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

BULLETIN 310B
VOL 2
TECHNICAL MANUAL
33 TELETYPEWRITER SETS
KEYBOARD SEND-RECEIVE (KSR)
RECEIVE-ONLY (RO)
AUTOMATIC SEND-RECEIVE (ASR)
TELETYPE CORPORATION, 5555 TOUHY AVENUE, SKOKIE, ILLINOIS
SEE INDIVIDUAL SECTIONS FOR COPYRIGHT NOTICES, PRINTED IN U.S.A.

INTRODUCTION
Bulletin 310B is a technical manual that provides general and specific information about the 33 Keyboard Send-Receive (KSR), Receive-Only (RO), and Automatic Send-Receive (ASR) Teletypewriter Sets and their component units. It consists of two volumes.
Volume 1 contains a description of the 33 Teletypewriter Sets and gives installation instructions. Also included in Volume 1 is information on the disassembly and reassembly, lubrication, and principles of operation of the component units of the Teletypewriter Sets. Volume 2 includes adjustment information on all component units of 33 Teletypewriter Sets.
Each volume is made up of a group of appropriate independent sections. Each independent section is complete within itself-—it is separately identified by a title and section number, and the pages are numbered consecutively.
Each individual section is identified by a 9-digit section number which appears at the topof each page of asection. The sectionnumber appears on the left corner of left-hand pages and on the right corner of right-hand pages. In addition, the section number on each page contains the suffix TC which identifies it as a Teletype Corporation section. All sections are placed in the technical manual in ascending numerical order.
To locate specific information, refer to the table of contents on the following page. In the first column, under "Equipment," find the name of the component unit or set in question. Move across the page to the second column and locate the title being sought. The applicable 9-digit section number can then be found in the third column. Turn to Page 1 of the applicable section, and the contents of that section will be found.

1, GENERAL
1.01 This section provides adjustment information for 33 keyboards which are mechanically reset by an H-plate and the distributor trip linkage shown in 2.14. It is reissued to include information only on 33 keyboards. Also, this issue updates information and adds new information on the auxiliary contact mechanism used on parity keyboards and keylever springs used on numeric-type keyboards. Since this is a general revision, marginal arrows ordinarily used toindicate changes and additions are omitted.
Note: Adjustment information for solenoid-reset keyboards is found in another section.
1.02 In the adjustments covered in this section, location of clearances, position of parts, and point and angle of scale applications are points or slots to make an adjustment, place a screwdriver between the points or in the slots and pry parts in the proper direction.
1.06 When the keyboard is removed from the subbase to facilitate the making of an adjustment and subsequently replaced, recheck any adjustments that may have been affected. Also, if parts are removed from the keyboard to facilitate the making of an adjustment, be sure that they are subsequently replaced. Recheck any adjustment that may have been affected by the removal of parts.
1.07 Related adjustments are listed with some of the adjustmenttexts and are primarily intended to aid in troubleshooting the equipment. As an example, suppose that in searching for a trouble it is discovered that Part (2) of CONTACT WIRES adjustment does not meet its requirement. Under Related Adjustment it is indicated that Part (2) of this adjustment is affected by Part (1). Check Part (1) to see if it is the basic cause of the trouble. Also, note that certain adjustments affect other adjustments. For example, see the DISTRIBUTOR TRIP LINKAGE adjustment. Note that this adjustment affects the TRIP LEVER ENGAGEMENT adjustment. (See the appropriate typing unit section.) If the former adjustment is changed, check the latter adjustment.
1.08 The spring tensions specified in this section are indications, not exact values. Therefore, to obtain reliable readings, it is important that spring tensions be measured by Spring scales placed in the positions shown on pertinent linedrawings. Springs that do not meet their requirements should be replaced by new ones. Only those springs that directly affect the operation of the keyboard are measured, however, others may be measured indirectly in the process. If, at first, the spring tension requirement cannot be met, replace the indicated spring being directly measured. Then, if the requirement is not met, any springs that are indirectly measured in the procedure should be replaced, one at a time, with the performance of requirement checks each time a spring is replaced.
Note 1: Use only spring scales which are recommended by the manufacturer. These spring scales are listed in Maintenance Tools Section 570-005-800TC.
Note 2: The spring tensions may be checked in any sequence.
1.09 With the keyboard and typing unit assembled together on the subbase, adjustment procedures may specify that the typing unit be placed in the stop condition. It is in the stop condition when the selector armature is in its attracted (frontward) position and all clutches are disengaged. Furthermore, when the typing unit is in the stop condition the keyboard will be latched --- universal lever down and blocked from upward movement by an associated latch-lever.
Note: The keyboard is tripped when the universal lever is in its up position.
1.10 To place the typing unit in the stop condition, hold the selector armature in its attracted (frontward) position. Manually rotate the main shaft clockwise (as viewed from the left) until all clutches are in a stop position. Fully disengage all of the clutches by positioning ascrewdriver to the associated stop-lug. Push the clutch disc in the normal direction of main shaft rotation until the corresponding latchlever seats in its clutch disc notch. This permits the clutch shoes to release their tensions on the clutch drum. With all clutches disengaged, the main shaft will turn freely without any dragging of the clutch shoes.
Note 1: A stop position is that position where a shoe lever contacts a trip lever.
Note 2: The distributor clutch will not disengage unless the keyboard is latched and the answer-back drum is in its home position. The answer-back home position is the position where the control lever is fully detented into the indent on the answer-back drum.
1.11 A clutch is tripped by moving a trip lever up and away from contact with a shoe lever. When moved up, a trip lever no longer holds a shoe lever in its stop position. When the clutch is tripped, the shoe lever and a stop-lug on the clutch disc move apart, and the clutch becomes engaged. The clutch shoes wedge against the drum so that when the shaft is turned the clutch assembly will turn in unison with it.
1.12 General Maintenance Principles
(a) Lubrication instructions and intervals are given in the appropriate lubrication sections.
(b) To maintain the operational effectiveness of the equipment, it is recommended that certain parts be replaced at intervals based upon the speed and operating hours, as indicated below:
Operating Recommended
Speed Overhaul Estimated
(Words per Interval Service Life
(Minute) (Hours*) (Hours*)
100 1500 4500
*Typing unit operating hours
Replacement parts are available in overhaul kits.

33 TYPING UNIT
ADJUSTMENTS
1, GENERAL
1.01 This section provides adjustment information for the 33 typing unit. New within this issue is (a) exclusive coverage of 33 typing unit, (b) engineering changes, (c) two-color printing and typing unit suppression features, (d) revised order of adjustments, (e) title changes (which now provide a functional description of the associated area). Marginal arrows indicating changes are omitted.
1.02 In the adjustments covered in this section, location of clearances, position of parts, and point and angle of scale applications are illustrated by line drawings. Requirements and procedures are set forthin the several texts that accompany the line drawings. Required tools are included in TP185830 maintenance tool kit and are listed in Section 570-005-800. A DXD800 Signal Distortion Test Set was used to determine the requirements for the selector receiving margins.
1.03 Adjustments are divided into two categories -— basic and variations. Basic adjustments apply to all friction feed and/or sprocket feed typing units. Adjustments found under variations apply only totyping units which have the particular feature (s) under consideration. The F and § following an adjustment title mean that the adjustment applies only to friction feed (F) or sprocket feed (S) typing units. No letter designation indicates that the adjustment applies to both types of equipment.
1.04 Adjustments are presented in a definite order which is considered the best to follow when completely readjusting the equipment. Certain interrelated adjustments, which appear on the same page, should be checked and adjusted in a definite sequence. The sequence is indicated by the letters (A), (B), etc. No single adjustment should be undertaken without first completely understanding the procedure and knowing the requirements. Therefore, read a procedure all the way through before making an adjustment or checking a spring tension.
Note: Disconnect the typing unit from any AC or DC potential prior to inspection, minor repair, extensive maintenance, or a complete readjustment.
1.05 References to left, right, front, rear, etc consider the typing unit to be viewed from a position where the carriage area faces up and the selector area is located to the viewer's left.
1.06 Unless specifically stated otherwise, make screws or nuts friction tight to make an adjustment and tighten them securely once the adjustment has been made.
1.07 When a procedure calls for using pry points or slots to make an adjustment, place a screwdriver between the 'points or in the slots and pry parts in the proper direction.
1.08 Due to a high degree of congestion within certain areas of some typing units, some disassembly will be required prior to making certain adjustments. If parts or subassemblies are removed from the typing unit to facilitate the making of an adjustment, be sure that they are subsequently replaced. Recheck any adjustments that may have been affected by the removal of parts or subassemblies.
Note 1: Do not remove parts and/or subassemblies unless it is considered absolutely necessary to perform an adjustment.
Note 2: Instructions for the disassembly and reassembly of parts and/or subassemblies are given in the appropriate disassembly and reassembly section and/or appropriate illustrated parts section.
Note 3: Do not lift typing unit while holding any part of the selector mechanism. Excessive strain on the selector mechanism, due to the weight of the typing unit, may cause selector malfunctioning. See appropriate disassembly and reassembly section for the proper method of lifting typing unit from its subbase.
1.09 Related adjustments are listed with some of the adjustment texts and are primarily intended to aid introubleshooting the equipment. As an example, suppose that in searching for a trouble it is discovered that the FUNCTION CLUTCH POSITION adjustment does not meet its requirement. Under Related Adjustments it is indicated that this adjustment is affected by the LEFT BEARING POSITION adjustment. First, check it to see if it is the cause of the trouble. Also, it is indicated that the FUNCTION CLUTCH POSITION adjustment affects FUNCTION CLUTCH ENDPLAY, CODEBAR CLUTCH ENDPLAY, and CODEBAR CLUTCH TRIP LEVER LINE-UP adjustments. If the former adjustment is changed, check the latter adjustments.
Note: Information in parentheses () following any related adjustment gives the associated paragraph number and area, if different from the paragraph number at the top of the page.
1.10 The spring tensions specified in this section are indications, not exact values. Therefore, to obtain reliable readings, it is important that spring tensions be measured by spring scales placed in the positions shown on pertinent line drawings. Springs that do not meet their requirements should be replaced by new ones. Only those springs that directly affect the operation of the typing unit are measured, however, others may be measured indirectly in the process, If, at first, the spring tension requirement cannot be met, replace the indicated spring being directly measured. Then if the requirement is not met, any springs that are indirectly measured in the procedure should be replaced, one at a time, with the performance of requirement checks each time a spring is replaced.
Note 1: Use only spring scales which are recommended by the manufacturer and found in Maintenance Tools Section 570-005-800.
Note 2: The spring tensions may be checked in any sequence.
1.11 All adjustment procedures should be started with the typing unit in the stop condition. It is in the stop condition when the selector armature is in its attracted (frontward) position and all clutches are disengaged.
1.12 To place the typing unit in the stop condition, use TP185832 armature clip to hold the selector armature in its attracted (frontward) position. Rotate the main shaft clockwise (as viewed from the left) until all clutches are in a stop position. Fully disengage all of the clutches as instructed in 1.13 following.
Note 1: A stop position is that position where a shoe lever contacts a trip lever.
Note 2: The distributor clutch will not disengage unless the answer-back drum is in its home position, which is the position where the control lever is fully detented into the indent on the answer-back drum.
1.13 When disengaged, a clutch is latched so that a shoe lever is held in its stop position by a trip lever while a corresponding latchlever is seated in a notch of the clutch disc. This allows the clutch shoes to release their tension on the clutch drum. With all clutches disengaged, the main shaft will turn freely without any clutch shoes dragging.
Note: If the shaft is turned by hand, a clutch Will not fully disengage upon reaching a stop position. Where an adjustment procedure calls for disengagement, rotate the clutch to a stop position, apply a screwdriver to the associated stop-lug, and push the clutch disc in the normal direction of main shaft rotation until the corresponding latchlever seats in its clutch disc notch. As a reminder, the word "latched" follows instructions to disengage the clutches.
1.14 A clutch is engaged when a trip lever is moved up so that it no longer holds a shoe lever in its stop position. When this action occurs, the shoe lever and a stop-lug on the clutch disc move apart, and the clutch shoes wedge against the drum, so that when the shaft is turned, the clutch will turn in unison with it.
1.15 Manual Operation: To manually operate the typing unit, place it in the stop condition as instructed in 1.12 and 1.13. Momentarily permit the armature to move to its unattracted (rearward) position to trip the selector clutch. Slowly rotate the main shaft clockwise (as viewed from the left) until all push levers have moved under their respective selector levers, Using a spring hook, strip the push levers from under the selector levers corresponding to the spacing elements of the code combination to be set up. Then continue to rotate the main shaft until the proper condition is set up or the character is cleared through the typing unit.
1.16 The selector levers are numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 6, and 8 from left to right. To set up the character Y, for example, whose 8-level code combination is 1--45-78, strip the push levers from the 2, 3, and 6 selector levers.
1.17 Code combinations within this section are not always given as parity codes. Parity codes are obtained by proper transformation of the eighth code level as explained in the typing unit principles of operation section.
1.18 To aid in physically locating the adjustments and spring tensions, the typing unit is divided into eleven areas. These areas are indicated in Figures 1 through 4 as follows:

TELETYPE CORPORATION
Skokie, Illinois, U.S.A.
SECTION 574-124-700TC
Issue 2, July, 1967

33 TAPE READER
ADJUSTMENTS
CONTENTS PAGE 1.
1.01 This section provides adjustment and maintenance information for the 33 tape reader. It is reissued to provide exclusive coverage of the 33 tape reader and to update the section. Since this is a general revision, marginal arrows ordinarily used to indicate changes and additions are omitted.
1.02 In the adjustments covered in this section, location of clearances, position of parts, and point and angle of scale applications are illustrated by line drawings. Tools required to perform adjustments are contained in TP185830 Tool Kit and are listed in Maintenance Tool Section 570-005-800.
Note: An adjustment must be performed even if the accompanying illustration is not an exact duplication of the adjustment area.
1.03 The sequence in which the adjustments appear should be followed when a complete readjustment of the tape reader is undertaken. No adjustment should be undertaken without completely understanding the procedure and the requirements. Read a procedure all the way through before making an adjustment or checking a spring tension.
Note 1: Be sure to check all related adjustments (Paragraph 1. 07).
Note 2: Remove all electric power before checking or performing adjustments.
1.04 References to left, right, front, rear, etc consider the tape reader to be viewed from a position where the feed wheel faces up and the lid latch is located to the viewer's right. Orientation references to the clutch trip area consider the armature extension to be facing up with the contact bracket pry points located to the viewer's right.
TAPE READER AREA
1.05 When a procedure calls for using pry points or slots to make an adjustment, place a screwdriver between the points or in the slots and pry parts in the proper direction.
1.06 If parts are removed from the tape reader to facilitate making an adjustment, be sure that they are replaced.
Note: Recheck any adjustment that may have been affected by the removal of parts.
1.07 Related adjustments are listed with some of the adjustment text and are primarily intended to aid in troubleshooting the equipment. As an example, suppose that in searching for a trouble it is discovered that the BLOCKING PAWL (Tape Reader Area) adjustment does not meet its requirement. Under "Related Adjustment," it is indicated that this adjustment is affected by the DETENT LEVER (Tape Reader Area) and FEED PAWL (Tape Reader Area) adjustments. Check these to see if either is the cause of the trouble. Also, note that certain adjustments affect other adjustments. For example, see the DETENT LEVER (Tape Reader Area) adjustment. Note that this adjustment affects the FEED PAWL (Tape Reader Area) and BLOCK PAWL (Tape Reader Area) adjustments. If the former adjustment is changed, check the latter adjustments.
1.08 The spring tensions specified in this section are indications, not exact values. Therefore, to obtain reliable readings, it is important that spring tensions be measured by spring scales placed in the positions shown on pertinent line drawings. Springsthat do not meet their requirements should be replaced by new ones. Only those springs that directly affect the operation of the tape reader are measured, however, others may be measured indirectly in the process. If this is the case and the requirement is not met, replace the springs one at a time, starting with the indicated spring, until the requirement is satisfied.
Note 1: Use spring scales which are listed in the Maintenance Tool Section 570-005-800.
Note 2: Spring tensions may be checked in any sequence.
1.09 Certain adjustments specify that an armature is to be in its attracted position prior to checking a requirement. This refers to an armature's position when it is magnetically attracted to its magnet core.
CAUTION: THE TAPE READER FEED MAGNET OPERATES UNDER HIGH VOLTAGE. PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES SHOULD BE TAKEN WHENEVER POWER TO THE TAPE READER IS TURNED ON. HIGH VOLTAGE WILL CONTINUE UNTIL APPROXIMATELY 10 SECONDS AFTER THE POWER PACK HAS BEEN DISCONNECTED.
1.10 When inserting a tape that hasoriginated from the tape punch, into a tape reader, allow some slack in the tape between the punch and the reader. This is done toclose the reader tape lid.
Note: Do not place the control lever directly into the FREE position while the tape reader is operating under power. Place the control lever into the STOP position and wait until after the tape reader has stopped before moving it beyond the STOP position and into the FREE position. The FREE position of the control lever is used to facilitate the insertion and/or removal of paper tape from the tape reader.
1.11 All adjustments in the "Clutch Trip Area" should be started with the typing unit in the stop condition. It is in the stop condition when the selector armature is in its attracted (frontward) position and all clutches are disengaged.
1.12 To place the typing unit in the stop condition, hold the selector armature in its attracted (frontward) position. Rotate the main shaft clockwise (as viewed from the left) until all clutches are fully disengaged as instructed in 1. 13 below.
1.13 When disengaged, a clutch is latched so that a shoe lever is held in its stop position by a trip lever while a corresponding latch-lever is seated in a notch of the clutch disc. This allows the clutch shoes torelease their tensions on the clutchdrum. With all clutches disengaged, the main shaft will turnfreely without any clutch shoes dragging.
Note 1: The clutch stop position is that position where a shoe lever contacts a trip lever.
Note 2: If the shaft is turned by hand, a clutch will not fully disengage upon reaching a stop position. Where anadjustment procedure requires disengagement, rotate the clutch to a stop position, apply a screwdriver to the associated stop-lug, and push the clutch disc in the normal direction of main shaft rotation until the corresponding latchlever seats in its clutch disc notch.
Note 3: The distributor clutch willnot disengage unless the answer-back drum is in its home position, whichis the position where the control lever is fully detented into the indent on the answer-back drum.
1.14 There are two areas inwhich tape reader adjustments and spring tensions are found. As aids in locating the areas, Figures 1 and 2 are provided. They indicate the areas as follows:
Area Figure
Clutch trip 2
Tape reader 1
1.15 General Maintenance Principles:
(a) Lubrication instructions and intervals are given in the appropriate lubrication sections.
(b) To maintain the operational effectiveness of the equipment, it is recommended that certain parts be replaced at uniform intervals. Below is the recommended overhaul interval as recorded in typing unit operating hours.
Estimated Operating Speed (words per minute) 
100
Overhaul Service Interval
1500 hrs* 
Life
4500 hrs*
*Typing unit operating hours
Replacement parts are available in overhaul maintenance kits.
2. BASIC UNIT
2.01 Clutch Trip Area
MAGNET CORE
Requirement
Magnet core slot to be perpendicular to magnet bracket pivot surface as gauged by eye.
To Adjust
With clutch trip coil mounting screw loosened, position clutch trip coil. Tighten screw.
3. VARIATIONS TO THE BASIC UNIT
3.01 Tape Reader Area
Note: The following adjustment applies to readers equipped with timing contacts.
RESET AND BUSY SWITCH TIMING
(1) Requirement (Preliminary)
The busy and reset switches should be centered in their bracket slots.
(2) Requirement (Final)
With the sensing pins fully down, the reset switch should be closed and the busy switch should be open. With the sensing pins fully up (energized position), the reset switch should be open and the busy switch should be closed.
Note: Remove all electrical power sources from unit before checking or performing any adjustments.
1.05 References to left, right, front, or rear, etc consider the tape punch to be viewed from a position where the tape guide assembly faces up and the backspace lever is located to the viewer's left.
1.06 When a procedure calls for using pry points or slots to make an adjustment, place a screwdriver between the points or in the slots and pry parts in the proper direction.
1.07 If the tape punch is removed from the typing unit to facilitate making an adjustment and then replaced, recheck any adjustment that may have been affected. Also, if parts are removed from the tape punch to facilitate making an adjustment, be sure that they are replaced. Recheck any adjustment that may have been affected by the removal of the parts.
1.08 The spring tensions specified in this section are indications, not exact values. Therefore, to obtain reliable readings, it is important that spring tensions be measured by spring scales placed in the positions shown on pertinent line drawings. Springs that do not meet their requirements should be replaced by new ones. Only springs that directly affect the operation of the tape punch are measured, however, others may be measured indirectly in the process. If this is the case and the requirement is not met, replace the springs one at a time, starting with the indicated spring, until the requirement is satisfied.
Note 1: Use spring scales which are listed in the Maintenance Tools Section 570-005-800.
Note 2: Spring tensions may be checked in any sequence.
1.09 Certainadjustments require that the tape punch be either "on" or "off." These conditiogs can be identified as follows:
(a) "Off" condition
(1) Manual (Punch) Controls: A tape punch is "off" when the control lever is in its clockwise detented position and fully engages the drive post.
(2) Automatic (Punch) Controls: An "automatic" tape punch is "off" when the associated typing unit is in the stop condition and the On-Off bail assembly is latched by the latch bail.
Note 1: If the automatic punch is equipped with the "On Lock" option, the "unlock" button must be depressed to enable the On-Off bail assembly to be latched.
Note 2: If the automatic punch is equipped with the interlock mechanism, the nonprint codebar must be in its unoperated position — solenoid not energized.
(b) "On" condition
(1) Manual (Punch) Controls: A tape punch is "on" when the control lever is detented in its counterclockwise position and the drive post is fully engaged by the drive link.
(2) Automatic (Punch) Controls: An automatic tape punch is "on" when the On-Off bail assembly is in its unlatched counterclockwise position.
1.10 With the tape punch and typing unit assembled together, all adjusting procedures should be started with the typing unit in the stop condition. It is in the stop condition when the selector armature is in its attracted (frontward) position and all clutches are disengaged.
Note: When the typing unit is in the stop condition and the punch is "on," the tape punch is said to be in the off position.
1.11 To place the typing unit in the stop condition, hold the selector armature in its attracted (frontward) position. Rotate the main shaft clockwise (as viewed from the left) until all clutches are fully disengaged as instructed in 1, 12.
1.12 When disengaged, a clutch is latched so that a shoe lever is heldin its stop position by a trip lever while a corresponding latchlever is seated in a notch of the clutch disc. This allows the clutch shoes to release their tension on the clutch drum. With all clutches disengaged, the main shaft will turnfreely without any clutch shoes dragging.
Note 1: The clutch stop position is that position wherea shoe lever contacts a trip lever.
Note 2: If the shaft is turned by hand, a clutch will not fully disengage upon reaching a stop position. To fully disengage a clutch, rotate the clutch to a stop position, apply a screwdriver to the associated stop-lug, and push the clutch disc in the normal direction of main shaft rotation until the corresponding latchlever seats in its clutch disc notch.
Note 3: The distributor clutch will not disengage unless the answer-back drum is in its home position, which is the position where the control lever is fully detented into the indent on the answer-back drum.
1.13 Manual Operation: To manually operate the typing unit, place it in the stop condition as instructed in 1.11. Momentarily permit the armature to move to its unattracted (rearward) position to trip the selector clutch. Slowly rotate the main shaft clockwise (as viewed from the left) until all push levers have moved under their respective selector levers. Using a spring hook, strip the push levers from under the selector levers corresponding to the spacing elements of the code combination to be set up. Then continue to rotate the main shaft until the proper condition is set up or the character is cleared through the typing unit.
1.14 The selector levers are numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 6, and 8 from left to right. To set up the character Y, for example, whose code combination is 1--45-78, strip the push levers from the 2, 3, and 6, selector levers.
1.15 The relationship between code levels, sensing levers, and codebar extensions is illustrated in Figure 2.
1.16 General Maintenance Principles
(a) Lubrication instructions and intervals are given in the appropriate lubrication sections.
(b) To maintain operating effectiveness of the equipment, it is recommended that certain parts be replaced at uniform intervals. Indicated below is the recommended overhaul interval as recorded in typing unit operating hours.
2.04 Tape Punch Area (continued)
Note 1: For the adjustments which follow, the tape punch should be mounted to the typing unit. For instructions, see section titled "33 Tape Punch, Disassembly and Reassembly. "
Note 2: The following Tape Punch Area adjustments must be made in sequence: TAPE PUNCH DRIVE, PUNCH PENETRATION, PAWL UPSTOP ASSEMBLY — FINAL, and FEED WHEEL RATCHET AND PAWL — FINAL. Prior to making the above adjustments, check or make the following Tape Punch Area adjustments: PAWL UPSTOP ASSEMBLY — PRELIMINARY, TAPE NUDGER, FEED WHEEL RATCHET AND PAWL — PRELIMINARY, and STRIPPER BAIL UPSTOP.
TAPE PUNCH DRIVE
To Check
With no tape in the tape punch and with the tape punch "on, " manually rotate the main shaft until the stripper bail is in its most forward position. Take up rear roller play toward rear and tape nudger play in a clockwise direction.
Requirement
Min 0.030 inch---Max 0.080 inch at point of least clearance between rear roller and tape nudger.
To Adjust Loosen adjusting screw and use pry points to position plate. Tighten screw.
To Check
Requirement
With the tape punch "on, " set up an Min 0. 017 inch---Max 0. 037 inch all-marking code combination in the between bottom surface of holder and selector. Manually rotate the main top surface of any lever. shaft until the stripper bail is in its most forward position.
To Adjust
With code lever post mounting screw (and support plate nut on late design units) friction tight, position post within the elongated base hole (and support plate hole — late design units). Tighten screw and nut.
To Check
With the tape punch "on, " set up an all-marking code combination in the selector. Manually rotate the main shaft until the stripper bail is in its rearmost position.
Note 1: For tape punches equipped with the answer-back blocking option or automatic controls, use the following "To Check" procedure:
To Check
With the tape punch "on," set up the code combination in the selector that will cause the special feature to operate. Manually rotate the main shaft until the stripper bail is in its rearmost position. Check requirement (1). Then, set up an all-marking code combination in selector. Manually rotate the main shaft until the stripper bail is in its rearmost position. Check requirement (2).
(1) Requirement
Min 0. 005 inch---Max 0.020 inch between the leftmost sensing lever (Figure 2) and its associated pawl.
Note 2: For tape punches equipped with automatic controls, the requirement will be checked between the second from the left sensing lever (Figure 2) and its associated pawl.
Note 3: There should also be some SPRING clearance between the rightmost sensing lever (Figure 2) and its associated pawl.
Note 4: "Some clearance" can be determined by feeling movement when pressing down on a sensing lever while holding its assembled lever in its most downward position.
(2) Requirement
Some clearance between the feed lever and its associated pawl and each sensing lever and its associated pawl.
To Adjust
Loosen the screw which secures the pawl upstop assembly post to the tape punch casting. Provide proper clearance by rotating the pawl upstop assembly. Tighten screw. Recheck requirement (1) above and refine if necessary. Remake STRIPPER BAIL UPSTOP (Tape Punch Area) adjustment.
CAUTION: EXERCISE CARE AND SEE THAT THE PLATE OF THE PAWL UPSTOP ASSEMBLY ALWAYS GUIDES THE PAWL AND LEVER SIMULTANEOUSLY. AVOID ROTATING PLATE IN A COUNTERCLOCKWISE DIRECTION FROM ITS VERTICAL POSITION IF POSSIBLE.
FEED WHEEL RATCHET AND PAWL — FINAL
To Check
With no tape in the tape punch and with the tape punch "on," set up an all-marking code combination in the selector. Manually rotate the main shaft until the stripper bail is in its rearmost position. Take up all play in stripper bail toward the front.
Requirement
With feed wheel ratchet in its fully detented position Min some---Max 0.005 inch between the feed pawl and feed wheel ratchet tooth.

To Adjust
Loosen screw and position plate w/bushing using pry points. Tighten screw. Backspace feed wheel ratchet one full. revolution, one tooth at a time, using backspace lever. Check each tooth to see if the requirement is met. Gauge by eye. Readjust where necessary.
Note: On late designed units equipped with a support plate, remove the two mounting screws and nut. Then move the support plate out of the way to facilitate checking this adjustment.
Position one end of spring to lower notch of arm w/ bushing. Operate the typing unit under power and perforate an alternate R and "hyphen" code combination in approximately 8 inches of tape. Tear the 8-inch length of punched tape from the tape punch and place it to the smooth side of TP156011 gauge. Concentrically align a no. 2 code hole of the punched tape with the first 0.072-inch diameter hole of TP156011 gauge.

(1) Requirement
The four remaining 0.072-inch diameter gauge holes should be visible through corresponding no, 2 code holes in the punched tape.
(2) Requirement
The no. 2 code hole which corresponds with the 0. 086-inch diameter gauge hole should lie entirely within the perimeter of that guage hole.
To Adjust
Position spring up arm w/bushing, notch by notch, until requirement is met.
Note: This adjustment applies only to tape punches equipped with the automatic control visual ON-OFF indicator option.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

BULLETIN 273B
TECHNICAL MANUAL
MODEL 32 AND 33
SEND-RECEIVE PAGE PRINTER SETS (KSR)
RECEIVE-ONLY PAGE PRINTER SETS (RO)
AUTOMATIC SEND AND RECEIVE SETS (ASR)
SECTIONS
Section 1 - Description
Section 2 - Installation
Section 3 - Operating Instructions
Section 4 - Adjustments and Spring Tensions
Section 5 - Disassembly and Reassembly
Section 6 - Lubrication
Section 7 - Principles of Operation

TELETYPE CORPORATION
5555 TOUHY AVENUE. SKOKIE, ILLINOIS
1962 AND 1963 TELETYPE CORPORATION IN THE UNITED STATES, COPYRIGHT IN ALL COUNTRIESPARTICIPATINGIN THE INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION AND PAN AMERICAN CONVENTIONS, ALL RIGHTS RESERVED INCLUDING RIGHTSOF TRANSLATION INTO ALL LANGUAGES. Printed in U.S.A.
LIST OF EFFECTIVE PAGES
FEBRUARY, 1963
(Supersedes Issue Dated October, 1962)
Model 32 Send-Receive Page Printer Set

INTRODUCTION
This bulletin provides description, installation, operating instructions, maintenance and principles of operation for the Teletype Model 32 and 33 Send-Receive Page Printer Sets. Parts information is furnished in Teletype Bulletin 1184B.,
For the sake of brevity, the equipment is referred to throughout the bulletin simply as a "Printer".
References in the text to left or right indicate the viewer's left or right as he faces the frontof the Printer.
In the illustrations, unless they are labeled otherwise, it is assumed the equipment is being viewed from the front.

SECTION 1
DESCRIPTION
1-1. GENERAL.
a. The Model 32 and 33 equipments described herein are electromechanical apparatus that provide terminal facilities for exchanging recorded communication via appropriate transmission facilities including telegraph lines, telephone networks and radio channels. They are designed for light-duty service in applications where the operation is not expected to exceed two hours per day.
b. The following equipments are covered:
(1) Send-Receive Page Printer Set (KSR Set) - Figure 1-1.
(2) Receive-Only Page Printer Set (R/O Set) - Figure 1-2.
(3) Automatic Send-Receive Set (ASR Set) - Figure 1-3.
c. Transmission and reception are effected by a start-stop signaling code (also referred to as teletypewriter code) which is carried by the transmission facilities. The basic difference between Model 32 and 33 apparatus is that the former utilizes a five-level code and the latter utilizes an eight-level code (See Section 7 for explanation of codes.) The equipment will operate at speeds up to 100 words per minute.

1-2. EQUIPMENTS DEFINED.
a. SEND-RECEIVE PAGE PRINTER SET (KSR Set) - Figure 1-1.
(1) The KSRSets provide facilities for originating messages for transmission by the manual operation of a keyboard, and for receiving and printing messages, whether originated locally or remotely, on page-width copy paper.
(2) The basic Printer consists of the following major components (Figures 1-1 and 1-4) which are described in the indicated paragraphs:
(a) Keyboard (par. 1-6).
(b) Printer Assembly (par. 1-7).
(c) Motor (par. 1-5).
(d) Call-Control Assembly (par. 1-12).
(e) Sub-Base (par. 1-8).
(f) Cover (par. 1-8).
(3) The keyboard, printer assembly and call-control assembly are mounted on the sub-base (Figure 1-4). The motor is mounted on the printer assembly. The cover encloses the other components and is attached to the sub-base. Paper feeds from a roll at the rear and is led around a platen where it is printed. A window permits viewing the printed copy. Facilities are provided for connecting the set to an a.c. power source and the transmission facilities.
(4) The Model 32 Sets have a three-row Keyboard (Figure 1-1) and use a five-level code. The Model 33 Sets have a four-row Keyboard (Figure 1-13) and use an eight-level code.
(5) The FOUR ROW FIVE-LEVEL KEYBOARD - This four-row keyboard accommodates basic five-level operation utilizing the conventional "LETTERS - FIGURES" shift characters.
b. RECEIVE-ONLY PAGE PRINTER SET (R/O Set) - Figure 1-2.
(1) The R/O Sets provide facilities for receiving messages and printing them on page-width copy paper.
(2) The basic R/O Set consists of the same components as the KSR Set listed in par. 1-2.a.(2) above. However, the Keyboard is blank and has no facilities for transmission.
(3) Par. 1-2.a.(3) above also applies to the R/O Sets.
(4) The Model 32 R/O Sets use a five-level code, and the Model 33 Sets use an eight-level code.
c. AUTOMATIC SEND-RECEIVE SET (ASR Set) - Figure 1-3.
(1) The ASR Sets provide facilities for originating messages for transmission by either the manual operation of a keyboard or the reading of perforated paper tape. They provide facilities for recording messages, whether originated locally or remotely, by perforating them in tape and/or printing them on page-width copy paper. The ASR Sets may be used in the following ways:
(a) To transmit messages from the keyboard while making a printed page copy with or without perforating tape.
(b) To receive messages from line and print them on page copy with or without perforating tape.
(c) To locally perforate messages in tape from keyboard for later transmission while making a printed page copy.
(d) To transmit messages from tape while making a page copy with or without perforating tape.
(2) The basic ASR Sets include the same components as the KSR Sets listed in par. 1-2.a.(2). In addition they have a tape reader (par. 1-10) and a tape punch (par. 1-11).
(3) Par. 1-2a.(3) above also applies to the ASR Sets. The tape punch and tape reader are mounted on the left side of the set. The tape feeds forward from a roll into the punch where it is perforated. It can then be fed into the reader for transmission. Controls are provided for the reader and punch. A removable metallic chad container collects the paper (chad) punched out of the perforations in the tape.
(4) Par.1-2.a.(4) also applies to the ASR Sets.

1-3. ACCESSORIES.
A number of optional accessories are available with the equipment including the following:
a. A sheet metal stand which supports the sets at a convenient operating level (Figure 1-11).
b. A copy holder with line guide (Figure 1-2).
c. Call control facilities including buttons, indicator lamps, motor control relay, speaker, ringer, buzzer, and rotary, touch-tone and card dialers (Figure 1-1 and 1-11).
d. Low paper alarm.
e. An answer back mechanism which will automatically identify a station by transmitting predetermined character sequences (Figure 1-10).
f. Optional functions including unshift on space and automatic carriage return - line feed.

1-4. TYPICAL APPLICATION (Figure 1-3).
a. The following is a brief description of how Model 32 or 33 apparatus, equipped with call control and answer-back features, may be used in a typical communication system (see Figure 1-5). When a call is to be made, an operator uses the controls on his Set to gain access to the system's switching and transmission facilities which may be dial telephone or telegraph networks. He then dials the number of the called station.
b. The switching center selects the proper station and signals an incoming call there by visual and/or audible indicators. Using the controls on his Set, the operator at the called station completes the connection and conditions the equipment so that communication can proceed in either direction, a fact that is indicated visually and/or audibly at the calling station (Variations of call control features provide unattended reception of calls.)
c. Ordinarily the stations then identify themselves by the answer-backfeature. The operator at the calling station can then type the message on his keyboard, or, if he has an ASR Set, can send it from perforated tape. In either case the Set translates the message to d.c. start-stop signals which it applies to the transmission facilities. The Sets at both the sending and receiving stations receive the signals and translate them to mechanical motions which print the message on page copy and/or, in the case of an ASR Set, perforates it in tape. If telephone networks are used, the d.c. signals are converted to tone frequencies for transmission and reconverted to d.c. signals for reception.
d. Finally, the operator at either station can terminate the call and return the equipments to their idle condition by his controls.

1-5. MOTOR AND DRIVE PARTS (Figure 1-6).
a. Mechanical motion for the Model 32 equipment is ordinarily provided by a two-pole, Single-phase synchronous motor which operates from 115 v.a.c. source and develops 25 milli-horse power at 3600 r.p.m. It consists basically of a housing, end bells, a wound stator, and a squirrel-cage rotor with shaft which rides on ball bearings. Cooling is provided by three fans - two within the end bells and one at the left end of the shaft. The motor is mounted by rubber vibration mounts which are clamped in a cradle formed by the printer assembly's base. A start capacitor, a current-operated start relay, and a run capacitor are mounted on the base to the left of the motor. A pinion on the right end of the shaft transfers the rotary motion generated by the motor to a setof drive parts which consist of a gear-pulley and motor belt.
b. The motor ordinarily used to provide motion for the Model 33 equipment is similar to the one described above except that it develops 33 milli-horse power, is equipped with sleeve bearings, and is not a capacitor-run motor.

1-6. KEYBOARD (Figures 1-7 and 1-8).
a. KSR and ASR KEYBOARD.
(1) In conjunction with a distributor mechanism on the printer assembly, the keyboard provides facilities for transmitting messages by the manual operation of a group of kevs. It includes the following components:
(a) A space bar and keys similar to those on a typewriter.
(b) A code bar mechanism which converts the manual depression of the keys to mechanical positions corresponding to the proper code combinations.
(c) A contact mechanism for conversion to start-stop signals by the distributor.
(d) A frame and two side brackets which support the mechanisms and a cover which serves as a guide for the keys.
(e) A cable with connector which electrically interconnects the keyboard with the call control assembly.
(2) Model 32 (Figure 1-7) - The Model 32 Keyboard (Figure 1-5) has three rows of keys and generates a five-level code that utilizes the letters-figures shift feature. To transmit the characters appearing on the lower part of keytops, the letters (LTRS) kev must first be pressed. To transmit the characters on the upper part of keytops, the figures (FIGS) key must first be pressed. Auxiliary keys such as line break (BREAK), repeat (REPT), and answer-back actuation (HERE IS) are located at the upper right of the three-rows.
(3) Model 33 (Figure 1-8) - The Model 33 Keyboard is similar to the Model 32 in appearance, but more closely resembles a typewriter keyboard. It has four rows of keys and generates an eight-level code. The characters on the lower part of the keytops, including the numerals in the upper row, can be transmitted without the use of a shift operation. A SHIFT key is used to transmit the printing characters (such as &, %, and #) appearing on the upper part of the keytops. A control (CTRL) key is used to transmit the control functions (such as WRU, BELL, and TAB) appearing on the upper keytops. The SHIFT or CTRL key must be held down while the character key is depressed.
b. R/O KEYBOARD (Figure 1-2) - The R/O keyboard has the frame and side brackets mentioned in par. 1-6.a.(1)(d) above. However, its cover is blank and it has no facilities for transmission described in par. 1-6.a.(1).
c. FOUR-ROW FIVE-LEVEL KEYBOARD - This four-row keyboard accommodates basic five-level operation utilizing the conventional "Letters - Figures" shift characters. In this keyboard the numbers (1 through 0) have been taken from the third row and put in the fourth row, and in addition to this an added feature has been incorporated, this being the blocking of the fourth row when the keyboard is in the "Letters" condition and the blocking of the third row when the keyboard is in the "Figures" condition.

1-7. PRINTER ASSEMBLY (Figures 1-9 and 1-10).
a. The printer assembly receives start-stop signals from the callcontrol assembly and uses them to control mechanical motions which print the messages, perform functions and, in the case of ASR Sets, perforate tape.
b. Its principal components include the following:
(1) A main shaft which receives motion from the drive parts and distributes it to the various mechanisms through three internal-expansion clutches.
(2) A selector mechanism which translates the start-stop signals to corresponding mechanical arrangements that control a codebar mechanism. A range finder permits the selector to be adjusted so as to sample the signals at the most favorable time.
(3) A code bar mechanism which controls printing, functions, and, in the case of ASR Sets, tape perforation. 
(4) A printing carriage which prints the messages on the paper. The characters are embossed on the cylindrical surface of a type-wheel. The wheel is positioned rotationally and vertically to select the proper characters, and a hammer drives it and an inked ribbon against the paper to effect printing. A ribbon mechanism feeds the ribbon and reverses its direction when one of its spools are depleted.
(5) A function mechanism which enables the equipment to perform functions supplementary to printing. The standard functions are space, carriage return, line feed, blank, bell, and - for the Model 32 - letters (lower case) and figures (upper case).
(6) A paper feed mechanism which positions the paper vertically so that the characters are properly located in lines. A platen feeds the paper. A knob permits manual feeding. The mechanism can be adjusted for single or double line feed.
(7) A spacing mechanism which positions the carriage so that the characters are properly located horizontally on the paper. It moves the carriage, which rides on rollers, by a spacing belt. It returns the carriage to the left margin by a carriage return spring. The carriage is pneumatically stopped without shock by a piston and dash-pot cylinder arrangement.
(8) A disk and brush type distributor mechanism which converts the positions of the keyboard contacts (see par. 1-6.a.(3)) to start-stop signals for application to the transmission.
(9) A cast base which provides mounting facilities for the mechanisms.
(10) Two cables with connectors which provide interconnection with the call control assembly.
(11) An answer-back mechanism (optional accessory) which, in conjunction with the distributor, will automatically transmit a sequence of characters for station identification. It may be coded to transmit any sequence of up to 20 characters and may be actuated locally or remotely. 

1-9. STAND (Figure 1-2).
Available as an accessory is a sheet metal stand which will support the equipment at a convenient operating level. It consists of chrome feet and an enclosure which will house auxiliary apparatus such as a Data Set and the reader power pack. A removable rear panel provides access to the enclosure. The feet are equipped with leveling screws and may be bolted to the floor.

1-8. COVER AND SUB-BASE (Figure 1-2). 
a. A plastic cover provides a decorative and protective enclosure of the printer assembly, keyboard and call control assembly. A lid, which is spring-detented in its open position, may be raised to gain access to the printer assembly for replenishing paper and ribbon. A window permits viewing the copy and provides a cutting edge for tearing the paper. Depressions at the rear of the cover hold the spindle for the paper roll. Mounting slots are provided for a copy holder. A name plate is mounted at the front.
b. The cover is mounted at its outer edges on a cast sub-base (see Figure 1-4) which serves as a foundation for the keyboard, printer assembly and call-control assembly. Rubber vibration isolators support the printer assembly. 

1-10. TAPE READER (Figure 1-3).
a. The tape reader, in conjunction with the distributor mechanism on the printer assembly, provides facilities for transmitting messages from perforated tape.
b. The complete reader package includes the following components:
(1) A tape sensing mechanism which converts code holes in the tape to corresponding positions in a set of contacts. The holes are sensed by pins which operate the contacts. The positions of the contacts are converted to start-stop signals by the distributor mechanism.
(2) A feed mechanism which advances the tape after a combination of code holes has been read. A pawl and ratchet arrangement rotates a feed wheel whose pins engage feed holes in the tape. The tape feeds from rear to front and is held down on the sensing pins and feed wheel by a hinged tape lid which may be opened to facilitate tape threading.
(3) A feed magnet and armature arrangement which supplies motion for the sensing and feed mechanisms. It is pulsed by a contact on the distributor mechanism.
(4) A magnet-controlled trip mechanism which actuates the distributor mechanism. It is mounted above the distributor on the printer assembly.
(5) A power pack, mounted in the enclosure of the stand, which provides current rectification for the feed magnet. It is protected by a metallic housing.
(6) A cable which inter-connects the reader with the power pack, the magnet pulsing contact and the call control assembly.
(7) Tape-out and tight-tape mechanisms which will stop the reader when it runs out of tape or when the tape becomes taut.
(8) A free wheeling mechanism which disengages the feed wheel and tape out mechanisms and permits the tape to be moved freely through the reader.
(9) A frame which is mounted on the printer's sub-base andprovides mounting tacilities tor the other mechanisms excluding the power pack and trip mechanism.
(10) A cast sub-base andplastic cover which provide a protective and decorative enclosure for the reader.
(11) The Auxiliary ASR Power Supply is mounted in the enclosure of the stand. It is used in the off line mode, to provide 115V on the Reader Keyboard, Answer-Back and Distributor Contacts only when a Reader is used. When the Reader is not used,a dummy plug with a jumper wire is inserted in position R2 at the rear of the Attendant's Set.

1-11. TAPE PUNCH (Figure 1-3),
a. The tape punch, in conjunction with the selector and code bar mechanisms on the printer assembly, provide facilities for perforating messages in paper tape. The messages are received as start-stop signals from the call-control assembly and are converted to mechanical motions that punch corresponding code holes in the tape.
b. The punch includes the following components:
(1) A drive mechanism and power bail which receive motion from the rocker shaft on the printer assembly and distributes it to the other mechanisms.
(2) A sensing mechanism which receives intelligence from the code bar mechanism on the printer assembly (see par. 1-7.b.(2) and (3)).
(3) A perforating mechanism, which, under the controlof the sensing mechanism, perforates feed and codeholes in the tape by means of pins in a punch block.
(4) A feed and guide mechanism that advances the tape by means of rollers and pawl and ratchet arrangement.
(5) A cast frame which is attached to the printer base and provides mounting facilities for the various mechanisms.
(6) A supply reel which accommodates a roll of blank tape.
(7) A cast sub-base and two-piece plastic cover which provides a protective and decorative enclosure for the punch.
(8) A metallic chad container which collects the paper (chad) punched out of the code holes.
c. The following four push-button contacts are provided:
(1) ON - Turns punch on.
(2) OFF - Turns punch off.
(3) REL. (Release) - Releases feed and guide mechanism so that tape can be easily removed from punch.
(4) B. SP. (Back Space) - Back spaces tape one combination of code holes.

1-12. CALL CONTROL ASSEMBLIES (Figures 1-12 and 1-13).
a. The call controi assemblies coupie tne equipment to the transmission facilities and serve as an area of convergence for its circuitry. Two typical assemblies are shown in Figures 1-12 and 1-13.
b. A sheet metal plate secured to the sub-base provides mounting facilities.
c. Call control assemblies are available in variations that incorporate certain combinations of the following features:
(1) A selector magnet driver which couples the equipment to the transmission facilities and repeats the line signals in a form that will efficiently operate the selector mechanism on the printer assembly. It includes a transistorized circuit cord, a transformer, a rectifier and a capacitor filter.
(2) Rotary, touch-tone and/or card dialers for making connections with other stations through dial switching facilities (Figures i-1i1, i-12 and i-13).
(3) A ringer or buzzer which provides an audible indication of incoming calls.
(4) A small speaker with volume control for monitoring dial tone, ringing and busy signals on telephone networks. It is driven by a transistorized amplifier card.
(5) Push-buttons and lamps to aid in initiating, accepting, controlling and terminating calls.
(6) A Motor Control relay which will automatically turn the motor on and off.
(7) Fuses which protect the circuitry of the equipment.
(8) Automatic answering circuitry.
(9) Interconnecting facilities including receptacles, cables and a terminal board.

1-13. TECHNICAL DATA.

SECTION 2
INSTALLATION
2-1. GENERAL.
This section provides instructions for unpacking, installing, connecting, and preparing the Printer for use, A 115 v.a.c. power source and signal-line battery and leads must be furnished by the customer. For detailed power and signal line requirements, see Section 1.
2.2 UNPACKING
a. The Printer is packed in one carton. Observe all caution and instruction labels on carton before breaking seals. Remove upper filler pads. Carefully take out Printer, using caution to avoid marring or otherwise damaging plastic cover. Remove remaining carton fillers and take out stand (if used).
b. Printer assembly and sub-base are mounted on a wooden shipping pallet by seven screws. Four of the screws are #14Z self-tapping screws that secure sub-base to pallet. Remaining three are standard machine screws that pass through aluminum bushings into tappedholes in printer assembly's base. Since printer assembly floats on rubber mounts, it is secured with separate screws. Tilt mounted set and take out screw in counter-sunk hole first. Loosen remaining six screws Slightly. Return Printer to its upright position, Slide it to edge of the bench and remove six screws by hand. Printer can now be lifted from pallet. Discard seven mounting screws and three aluminum bushings.
CAUTION
Do not tilt the Printer after it has been removed from the pallet. Printer assembly floats on rubber isolators and may pull loose if assembly is tilted.
2-3, PREPARATION FOR INSTALLATION.
a. Remove tape across top of cover and take out cables, platen knob, and paper spindle from paper recess. Unwrap parts.
b. Remove panel cover on call control assembly by removing its mounting screw (Model 33 Printers only). Remove volume control knob by pulling frontward. Remove name plate by pulling frontward and downward (Figure 2-1). This will expose four cover mounting screws. Remove these screws and three mounting screws from rear of cover, Remove platen knob. Lift cover from sub-base.
c. Remove twist-tie on left side that holds printing carriage and tissue paper below it that retains spacing pawls.
d. If stand is used, place it in an uncrowded area. Remove two mounting screws and take off rear panel. Remove copy holder (if used) from inside stand. Take hardware out of bag tied to stand,
e. Using screws supplied with Data Set (if used), fasten Set to relay rack. 
2-4, MOUNTING PRINTER ON STAND (IF USED. (Figure 2-2.)
a. If Printer is to be bolted to floor, remove front screw in each Jeg of stand (Figure 2-5).
b. Printer is mounted on stand (Figure 2-2) by four #14Z screws with flat washers. (Some Printers may use two #14Z screws and two #10-32 hex head screws. Two #14Z screws are used in two rear mounting holes and two #10-32 screws with flat and lock washers in two front tapped bosses of the sub-base.)
c. Place Printer on top of the stand so that its back edge and sides line up with back edge and sides of the stand. Support Printer at all times until one or preferably both rear screws are inserted and tightened. Insert #14Z screws carefully to avoid dislodging speed nut located in sub-base casting. There are three pairs of holes in top of stand. The most rearward and most frontward pairs are used, Secure mounting screws.
2-5. CODING ANSWER-BACK DRUM (IF USED).
a. Remove answer-back drum as follows: Disengage distributor clutch. Standat rear of Printer and rotate answer-back drum in frontward direction, while pulling toward rear against tension of contact springs and detent lever, until drum shaft is just clear of right and left slots in contact block. Lift feed pawl and remove drum, (Do not over-extend the feed pawl spring.)
b. Code drum in counter-clockwise direction, as viewed from numbered end, beginning with the number 1 row. Drum provided is intended for either 5 or 8-level operation. For 5-level operation, tines for remaining 3 levels may be left intact since there are no sensing contact springs in these positions. A row is coded by breaking off designated tines. Refer to Figure 2-3 or 2-4 for tines to be removed for a particular character. To remove tine, grasp it firmly with long-nose pliers and breakit off near its base, using care not to damage adjacent tines. In addition to this procedure, it should be noted that when removing the tine, the long-nose pliers should be held stationary while rotating the drum back and forth until the tine breaks. Unused character rows may be coded for LETTERS or BLANK or other desired characters, or first character suppression tine can be broken out preventing any character from being transmitted from this row.* If it is necessary to erase a character or if a coding error is made, first character suppression tine can be removed from that row sothat nothing will be transmitted from it. 
c. Station identification messages cannot contain more than 20 characters including spaces. Coding message normally begins and ends with CARRIAGE RETURN and LINE FEED, This assures that message will appear at the beginning of a line on distant Printers and that over-printing of message will not occur. For 5-level Printers LETTERS code combination is also included at beginning of message to place all printers on circuit in unshift position. Two levels (see Figure 2-3 or 2-4) must always be coded the same. These are "stop cam" and the "first character suppression level." One, two or three positions in stop cam and first character suppression levels must be broken out depending upon length of answer-back message and whether one, two, or three cycle operation is used. Usetwo or three cycle operation for short message lengths. Two cycle operation will permit 9 characters to be coded in each half of drum. Three cycle will allow 6 characters to be coded in each third of drum.
d. To replace coded answer-back drum, lift the feed pawland rest drum shafton top of right and left sides of contact block. Drop pawl onto drum, and rotate drum frontward while pulling it toward rear against contact springs and detent lever until shaft drops over rearof contact block on right and left sides. Lower drum until shaft seats into right and left slots. Rotate drum against its detent to assure proper seating of associated parts. Check that contact springs are located in their proper slots.
2-6. ADJUSTMENTS
a. Check Dashpot Orifice adjustment since altitude may have some effect on dashpot operation. Also check Distributor Trip Linkage and Here-Is Bell Adjusting Bracket adjustments. See Section 4 for adjusting procedures.
a. WITHOUT STAND. If no stand is included in Set, place Printer on surface where it is to be used,
b. WITH STAND.
(1) Place partially assembledSet where it is to be used, and check for rocking. This may be corrected by adjusting leveling screws located under rear corners of stand (Figure 2-5). Tip the stand slightly for access.
(2) If Printer is to be bolted to floor, place stand at desired location and drive lag bolts into floor through front holes in legs.
(3) Place relay rack with Data Set inside stand.
2-8. ELECTRICAL CONNECTION,
CAUTION Make sure power cord is not connected.
a. Refer to appropriate wiring diagrams packed with Printer.
b. Connect signal line leads (supplied by customer) to terminals 8 and9 on terminal board at rear of call control assembly (Figure 2-6) for Model 32 Printers.
c. Where Data Set is used, connect connectors on cables from Data Set to those on cables from call control assembly. Connect telephone line to terminals 7 and 8 for the Model 33 Printers. Connect Data Set power leads to terminals 3 and 4 for Model 32 Printers; to terminals 1, 2 and 4 for Model 33. Maintain correct polarity.
d. Connect polarized powercord to 115 v. 60-cycle source.
2-9, FINAL ASSEMBLY.
a. Replace back panel on stand (if used) using removed screws,
b, Replace cover over Printer (Figure 2-1), taking care that all seams are tight and that keyboard push buttons, dial, etc., are properly aligned through holes provided. Insert and tighten three flat head screws at back and four hex head screws at front.
c. Replace nameplate making sure formed lip fits around bottom of flange on cover, that top edge is behind small lip oncover, and that bottom of plate rests on top of two small projections on sub-base.
d. With flat sides aligned, push platen knob on left end of platen.
2-10. COPY HOLDER (IF USED) (Figure 2-7).
a. Stand at rear of Printer, Hold copy holder so that line guide faces frontward. Locate four mounting slots in cover, two on either side of paper roll mounting recess. Tilt copy holder toward rear and partially insert rear right and left tabs on holder into respective rear right and left slots. Pivot copy holder forward until front right and left tabs align with front right and left slots. Push downward on copy holder until tabs are fully seated.
2-11. RIBBON INSTALLATION (Figure 2-8).
a. Raise lid on cover. Pull both spools off friction spindles.
b. Engage hook that is on end of ribbon in hub of empty spool; or if there is no hook, pierce end of ribbon over point of arrow in hub of empty spool. Wind a few turns of ribbon onto empty spool in direction indicated by arrow and make sure that reversing eyelet has been wound upon spool.
c. Place spools on shafts in such a manner that ribbon feeds to rear from right side of right spool and from left side of left spool (Figure 2-8). Turn each spool slightly until driving pinon spool Shaft engages hole in spool. Pull ribbon around right vertical post and through slot in reverse arm. Place it in right slot of ribbon guide, around rear of guide on both right and left side and through left slot of guide. Pull it forward on left side, through reverse arm slot and around left side of left vertical post. Rotate the spool to take up any slack.
2-12, PAPER INSTALLATION (Figure 2-9).
a. Printer accommodates a standard roll of paper 8-1/2 inches wide, 5 inches in diameter.
b, Insert spindle into roll so that an equal length of spindle is exposed at either end of roll of paper.
c. Place roll into paper recess of cover so that ends of spindle rest in slots provided and so that paper will unroll forward from bottom.
d. Raise lid on cover. Fold leading edge of paper back and crease it to present smooth edge when threading it. Paper should unroll from bottom of roll, pass forward and up over straightener bail and down and under platen (Figure 2-9), Release pressure roller tension by moving paper lever frontward, and push paper in as far as it will go, Re-apply pressure roller tension and advance paper by turning platenknob clockwise (as viewed from right) until the paper can be passed under paper guide. Release tension on pressure roller again and straighten paper. Re-apply pressure roller tension to hold paper in place. Close cover lid.
2-13. HUM SQUELCH (Optional)
When Printer is not in use, the JID101A Data Set produces a hum through the loudspeaker. Also, the time clock synchronization signals can be heard. To squelch these modify wiring on J1D101A Data Set as follows:
a. Remove from terminal 50 on terminal board black-green lead going to 50-pin connector.
b. Add length of wire to removed lead and connect to common contact No. 7 of CON relay. Insulate splice with tape.
c. Add a lead connecting normally-closed contact No. 7 of CONrelayto common contact No. 5 of OR relay.
d. Add lead connecting normally-open contact No. 5 of OR relay to terminal 50 on terminal board.
2-14. MODEL 33 OPTIONAL FEATURES.
a. BUSY CIRCUIT - The Model 33 Printer is normally wired in a "do not answer" mode of operation for low-paper alarms and out of service. In this mode, the Printer will not answer an incoming call. To wire the Printer to indicate busy instead of not answering, move the BK-S wire from terminal 2 to terminal 4 on ringer terminal strip.
b. HAND RECEIVER - To install hand receiver, connect two white wires to terminals 5 and 6 on nine-point terminal board, a Retaining Ring (Figure 2-10) is assembled to the upstop shoulder screw to prevent the sensing pins from being dislodged during shipment. This retaining ring must be removed before placing the Tape Reader in operation. Check packing instructions.
2-16. POWER PACK ASSEMBLY.
a. The Power Pack Assembly (Figure 2-11) is snapped on (with two clips assembled to the RIGHT PANEL power pack), to the front panel of the printer stand. Position power packso it shall be spaced approximately 1/2 inch from the right panel of the printer stand.
b. The Auxiliary A is mount in the enclosure of the stand. It is used in the off line mode, to provide 115V on the Reader Keyboard, Answer-Back and Distributor Contacts only when a Reader is used. When the Reader is not used,a dummy plug with a jumper wire is inserted in position R2 at the rear of the Attendant's Set.
2-17. TAPE PUNCH.
This section provides installation instructions for the Tape Punch. The tape punch, set of drive parts, base and plastic cover assembly are assembled to the Model 32 or Model 33 Printer. However, before the Automatic Send and Receive Set is shipped a yellow packing clip is assembled under the sensing levers and behind the "O" code bar extension between the tape punch base and the left code bar extension guide. The tape punch must be in the "OFF" position. During the installation, remove the printer and tape punch cover assembly and remove yellow clip. It is very important that the clip is removed prior to operating the tape punch. Check packing instructions.
a. Installation of Tape Roll and Tape Spool Assembly (Figure 2-12).
(1) For the two inch inside diameter tape roll use the tube type spool.
(2) For the one inch inside diameter tape roll use the two piece spool.
(3) Assemble the tape with the spool into the cover so that the leading edge of the tape is always at the top of roll.
b. Installation of Chad Box Assembly (Figure 2-13).
(1) Assemble the Chad Box by inserting the back of the flanged surface between the tape punch base and the printer base.
(2) Push the box towards the rear until a bent surface located at the front of the box engages the printer stand. An embossing located on the front bottom surface of the flanged surface engages an oblong hole in the printer stand and holds the box in place.
(3) To empty the chad box, lift the front slightly and pull the box towards the front until it becomes disengaged.

SECTION 3
OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS
3-1. GENERAL
a. The Model 32 and 33 Printers provide facilities for exchanging printed messages between stations connected by appropriate transmission facilities. After taking certain preliminary steps such as signaling the distant station, etc., an operator types the message on the keyboard of his Printer. The Printer at the distant station prints the message on page-width copy paper. A local copy is made by the Printer at the sending station for record and monitoring purposes. Certain sets have call-control items such as pushbuttons, indicator lamps, dials, etc. (Figure 3-1). The Printers are described and illustrated in Section 2.
b. Par. 3-2 below lists and describes the items, common to most Printers, that are pertinent to the operation. Par. 3-2 and 3-3 provide instructions for replenishing paper and replacing the ribbon, respectively. Par. 3-4 and up contain detailed instructions for operating specific Printers.
a. Check the supply of paper at regular intervals. Replacement will depend on how frequently the Set is used. The Printer will accept a standard roll of paper, 8-1/2 inches wide and 5 inches in diameter.
b. To remove the expended roll of paper, tear it off at the window and lift it out of the recess in the cover. Pull the spindle out of the old roll of paper and insert it into the new roll so that an equal length of spindle is exposed at either end of the roll of paper.
Provides paper on which messages are printed. Supported by a spindle that rests in two depressions in cover. Is fed by a platen.
Permits platen to be turned by hand to advance paper. Used to replenish paper supply.
Permits viewing the printed messages. Has cutting edge for tearing off copy.
Provides access for replenishing ribbon and paper. Detented in open position.
Used to transmit messages. Spaces printing carriage without printing.
Raises paper so that successive lines can be printed.
Returns printing carriage to left margin so that new line can be started.
Provides repeated transmission of any character when held down with another key.
On Printers with answer-back feature, provides automatic transmission of predetermined sequence of characters to identify the station.
Used to interrupt transmission from distant station.
Conditions all Printers on circuit to print characters on lower keytops (lower case).
Conditions all Printers on circuit to print characters on upper keytops (upper case).
Rings to indicate that printing line is approaching right margin and that CR and LF keys. should be pressed.
c. Place the new roll into the paper recess of the cover so that the ends of the spindle rest in the slots provided and so that the paper will unrollforwardfrom the bottom. Rotate the platen manually to extract the piece of torn off paper.
d. Raise the lid on the cover. Fold the leading edge of the paper back and crease it to present a smooth edge when threading it. The paper should unroll from the bottom of the roll, pass forward and up over the straightener bail, down and under the platen (see Figure 2-9, Sec. 2). Release the pressure roller tension, and push the paper in as far as it will go. Re-apply the pressure roller tension and advance the paper by turning the platen knob in a clockwise direction (backwards) until the paper can be passed under the paper holder bar. Release tension on pressure roller again and straighten the paper. Re-apply the pressure roller tension to hold the paper in place. Close the cover lid. Check to see that the paper feeds properly in operation.

3-4, REPLACING RIBBON (Figure 2-8, Sec. 2).
a. Replace the ribbon on the Printer periodically when it becomes worn or frayed or when the printing becomes too light to make good copy. Raise the lid on the cover. Disengage the old ribbon from the ribbon guides and from around the type wheel. Pull both spools off of their respective friction spindles and roll all the ribbon onto one of the spools. Discard the one spool with the old ribbon and retain the empty spool.
b. Engage the hook that is on the end of the new ribbon in the hub of the empty spool or, if there is no hook, pierce the end of the ribbon over the point of the arrow in the hub of the empty spool. Wind a few turns of the ribbon onto the empty spool in the direction indicated by the arrow and make sure that the reversing eyelet has been wound up on the spool.
c. Place both spools on the ribbon spool shafts in such a manner that the ribbon feeds to the rear from the right side of the right spool and from the left side of the left spool (see Figure 2-8, Sec. 2). Turneach spool slightly until the driving pin on the spool shaft engages the hole in the spool. Pull the ribbon around the right vertical post and through the slot in the reverse arm. Place it in the right slot of the ribbon guide, around the rear of the guide on both the right and left side and through the left slot of the guide. Now pull the ribbon forward on the left side, through the reverse arm slot and around the left side of the left vertical post. Rotate the spool to take up any slack.
d. Check to see that the ribbon is properly seated and feeding correctly in operation. Return the lid to its closed position.

3-5. MODEL 32 PRINTER FOR DIAL TWX.
a. GENERAL — The Model 32 Printer used in the Bell System Dial TWX Service is equipped with call-control features which permit the operator to initiate, control, and terminate calls on dial telephone networks. These include pushbuttons, indicator lamps, a dial, a speaker, and an answer-back feature used in conjunction with a HERE IS and WRU (Figs C) key (see Figures 3-2 and 3-3).
b. TO INITIATE A CALL.
(1) To initiate a call, depress the originate (ORIG) pushbutton. The pushbutton will become illuminated and the Set will be connected to the telephone circuit so that the dial tone will be heard. If the line is busy, evidenced by the familiar telephone busy signal, depress the CLEAR pushbutton to disconnect the Set from the telephone network and initiate the call later.
(2) If the line is open (dial tone), dial the number of the distant called station. The progress of the call, dialing, ringing, busy signals, etc., will be heard over the speaker.
(3) When the called station acknowledges the call (by operation of the ANS pushbutton) a tone will be heard, following which the motor of the calling station will turn on, the speaker will be turned off, and message transmission can begin. No voice transmission is provided. Although it may vary in specific instances, the usual procedure is as follows: Transmit WRU (Figs C). This trips the answer-back mechanism at the distant station, which replies with its identifying code. After the identifying code of the distant station has been received, depress the HERE IS key. This trips the local answer-back mechanism which causes the printing of the calling station's identifying answer-back code at both the local and distant points. Transmission of the message proper Can now proceed from either station in turn but not from both simultaneously.
NOTE: Do not attempt to operate the keyboard during sending or receiving of the answer-back code.
(4) At the end of the message, either the local or the distant station may originate the disconnect by pressing the CLEAR pushbutton. The pushbutton will remain illuminated for a short time following the disconnect, after which the Set will again be idle and ready to receive or transmit again.
c. TO ANSWER A CALL.
(1) An incoming call will manifest itself by sounding on the ringer and flashing or pulsing of the answer (ANS) pushbutton lamp in response to the ringing signal. Depress the ANS pushbutton to complete the connection with the calling station. When the pushbutton is depressed the ringer is turned off and the ANS lamp will light continuously. Atone willbe heard for a short interval, following which the motor will turn on. Message transmission can now be carried on. It is usually preceded by the station identification codes initiated at the calling station as covered in paragraph 3-5. b. (3) and typed by the called printer in response to the transmitted signals. Message transmission can now originate from any station on the line.
(2) Following completion of message transmission, disconnect may be originated at either station. See paragraph 3-5. b. (4).
(3) Some Sets may be equipped for automatic answering. In this case, it will respond to ringing signals, turning itself on at the end of a ring interval and proceeding on through to traffic conditions. This will relieve the attending operator from immediate attention to each incoming call. The attention of the operator will be required, however, for message transmission and disconnect procedures, Automatic disconnect is another optional feature. It permits completely unattended reception of calls.
d. Local (LOCAL) operation provides maintenance procedures for off-line (i.e., non-transmitting) preparation of copy for future transmission, and for operator keyboarding practice. Depress the LOCAL pushbutton. The pushbutton will become illuminated, the motor will be turned on, and automatic answering facilities will be disabled. If an incoming signal is received during the time of local operation, the set will respond to the ringing signals and manual operation of the ANS pushbutton as required. Following operation of the Set in the LOCAL mode, operate the CLEAR pushbutton to return the Set to the idle condition.
e. In the test (TEST) position, signals that are received are re-transmitted for test and maintenance purposes. The TEST pushbutton is operated upon request.
g. Two difficulties that may be encountered in normal operation are a disconnect, due to loss of signal line, and dialing error, both of which can be detected by audible sounds or by failure of a called station to respond. These conditions can usually be corrected by pressing the CLEAR pushbutton to allow the telephone lines time to be cleared and then initiate the call again by depressing the ORIG pushbutton and re-dialing.

3-6. MODEL 32 PRINTER FOR TELEX,
a. GENERAL — The Model 32 Printer usedin the Western Union TELEX Service is similar to that described in par. 3-5. c. above, except that it operates with dial telegraph networks (see Figures 3-4 and 3-5),
b. TO INITIATE A CALL.
(1) Press the START pushbutton and hold it depressed until the DIAL lamp lights. See paragraph 3-6. d. (2), below, for CAUTION.
(2) The illuminated DIAL lamp indicates that the telegraph exchange is connected. Dial the number of the called station. If the call is completed, the DIAL lamp turns off, the connect (CONN) lamp is illuminated, and the motor is turned on. If the called station is busy, the CONN lamp turns on and the motor starts momentarily, then they both turn off and the Set returns to its idle condition. Place the call again when the line is clear.
(3) Message transmission procedures may differ. However, following the completion of a connect with acalled station, identification codes are usually exchanged. Transmit FIGS D, This will trip the answer-back mechanism at the called station which then replies with its identification code. After receiving the code from the distant station, press the HERE ISkey which trips the answer-back mechanism at the local station. Now type the message, which will be recorded by the Printer at each station. Exchange of intelligence, whether answer-back codes or the message proper, can originate from either the calling or called station once connection has been established, but not simultaneously.
NOTE: Do not attempt to use the keyboard during answer-back procedures or while receiving a message, as this will result in garbling.
(4) To terminate message transmission, press the STOP pushbutton and hold it depressed until the CONN lamp goes out and the motor is turned off. Disconnect can be effected from either station.
(5) Unattended reception of callsis provided. To get the attention of the operator, send FIGS BELL. For repeated ringing of the bell, transmit FIGS, and then hold the BELL and REPT keys down.
(6) Local operation is provided for off-line preparation of copy for future transmission, for operator keyboarding practice, or for maintenance purposes. Depress the LOCAL pushbutton. The LOCAL lamp will light, the motor will be turned on, and copy can be prepared without transmission. If an incoming signal is received during LOCAL operation, the buzzer will sound for approximately 2-1/2 seconds, after which local operation becomes disconnected, the LOCAL lamp goes out, the CONN lamp goes on, and the message will be typed.
c. TO ANSWER A CALL — It is not necessary to have an operator in attendance at the called station. Connection is made automatically, the message is automatically received and printed, and the calling station originates disconnect.
d. Difficulties that may be encountered in operation consist mainly of dialing errors or possible loss of signal line.
(1) Wrong numbers that are dialed can be detected by noting the answer-back code of the called station. To correct the error, operate the STOP pushbutton and originate the call again.
(2) When originating a call, the operator is CAUTIONED to hold the START pushbutton depressed until the DIAL lamp comes on. If the START pushbutton is released before this time, a connection with the exchange will not be effected and the call will have to be initiated again.
(3) If the signal line opens while the Set is in the idle condition, no change will be noted until an attempt is made to transmit a message. At this time, pressing the START button will result in immediate illumination of the DIAL lamp, and the Set will remain in this state, even if a number has been dialed, until correction has been made. To remedy this condition, notify the telegraph exchange, If the trouble is in the local Set, notify maintenance personnel.
(4) If the signal line is lost during message transmission, it will manifest itself by an open line condition in which the motor continues to run and the Printer, receiving no intelligence pulses, operates continuously on blank, This condition cannot be corrected by the operator other than to disconnect the power plug to the Set to stop the unit, and notify the telegraph exchange or maintenance of the condition.
(5) For difficulties that develop at the local station, press the STOP pushbutton to return the set to idle condition and pull the power plug before calling maintenance.

SECTION 4
ADJUSTMENTS AND SPRING TENSIONS
4-1, GENERAL
a. In the adjustments and spring tensions covered in this section, location of clearances, position of parts, and point and angle of scale applications are illustrated by drawings. Requirements and procedures are set forth in the texts that accompany the drawings.

4-2. LOCATION,
a. To aid locating the adjustments and spring tensions, the Printer is divided into ten areas. These areas are indicated in four photographs on pages 4-6 through 4-9 as follows:
1. Distributor Area Figure 4-1
2. Main Shaft Area Figure 4-1
3. Paper Feed Area Figure 4-1
4, Motor Area Figure 4-1
5. Selector Area Figure 4-2
6. Keyboard Area Figure 4-2
7. Carriage Area Figure 4-3
8. Spacing Area Figure 4-3
9. Function Area Figure 4-4
10. Answer-Back Area Figure 4-4
b. The Tape Reader consists basically of three packages. They are sub-assemblies:
1. Tape Reader
2. Clutch Trip Mechanism
3. Power Pack
c. The Tape Punch consists basically of two packages. They are sub-assemblies:
1. Tape Punch Unit
2. Tape Punch Unit Set of Drive Parts
d. The areas that the adjustments and spring tensions are in follow their titles in parenthesis. For example, LEFT BEARING (DISTRIBUTOR) appears on page 4-12. This indicates that the adjustment is in the distributor area. From the list above, it can be seenthat the location of this area is shown on Figure 4-1, As a further aid, parts and mechanisms that are especially important to the procedures are indicated on the photographs (e.g., distributor cam clutch on Figure 4-1).

4-3, ADJUSTMENTS.
a. The sequence in which the adjustments appear is that which should be followed when complete readjustment of the Printer is undertaken. On individual pages, the sequence is sometimes indicated by letters of the alphabet in parenthesis ---e.g., (A), (B) etc.
b. Unless specifically statedotherwise, make screws or nuts friction-tight to make an adjustment, and tighten them securely once the adjustment has been made.
c. When a procedure calls for using pry points or slots to make an adjustment (e.g., TRIP LEVER, page 4-14), place a screwdriver between the points or in the slots and pry parts in proper direction.
d. RELATED ADJUSTMENTS — The related adjustments listed in the texts are primarily to aid trouble shooting. As an example, suppose that in searching for a trouble it is discovered that the FUNCTION CAM CLUTCH ADJUSTMENT (page 4-16) does not meet its requirement. Under "RELATED ADJUSTMENTS" it is indicated that this adjustment is affected by the LEFT BEARING and CASTING adjustments. Check these to see if either is the basic cause of the trouble. It is also indicated that the FUNCTION CAM CLUTCH END PLAY adjustment is affected by the FUNCTION CAM-CLUTCH adjustment. If the latter is changed, check the affected adjustment.

4~4, SPRING TENSIONS.
a, The spring tensions are indications, not exact values. Therefore, measure them with Teletype scales in the positions shown in the drawings. Discard springs that do not meet the requirements and replace them with new ones.
b. Only the springs that directly affect the operation of the Set are included. Others may be indirectly measured. First replace the indicated spring. Then, if the requirement is not met, replace any that are indirectly measured in that procedure,
c. The spring tensions can be made in any sequence.

4-5. GENERAL PROCEDURE.
a. Read a procedure all the way through before making an adjustment or checking a spring tension.
b. Required tools, not supplied with the Printer, are listed in Teletype Bulletin 1124B,
c. STOP CONDITION.
(1) All procedures should be started with the Printer in the stop condition. It is in the stop condition when the selector armature is in its attracted (frontward) position (see page 4-24), all clutches are disengaged, and the keyboard universal lever is latched in its down position (see page 4-64).
(2) To place the Printer in the stop condition, hold the selector armature in its frontward position (see page 4-24), Rotate the main shaft clockwise (as viewed from left) until all clutches are in stop position, Fully disengage the clutches as instructed in paragraph 4-5e below.
NOTE: The distributor clutch will not disengage unless the answer-back drum is in its home position as shown on page 4-78.
d. The keyboard is tripped when the universal lever is in its up position.
e. When disengaged, the clutches are latched in their stop position between a trip lever, which bears against a shoe lever, and a latch lever which seats in a clutch cam disk (See page 4-22). The main shaft will then turn freely without the clutch shoes dragging. When the clutch is engaged, or tripped, the shoe lever and a stop lug on the cam disk are moved apart, and the clutch shoes are wedged against the drum so that the clutch turns in unison with the shaft (see page 4-23).

4-6, ALPHABETICAL INDEX.
a. BASIC PRINTER.
(1) Adjustments.
Armature Bracket (Selector)
Armature Spring (Selector)
Bearing Alignment (Various Areas)
Bell Clapper (Function)
Belt Tension (Motor)
Blinding Contact Wire (Answer-Back)
Blocking Follower Lever (Answer-Back)
Blocking Levers (Selector)
Brush Holder (Distributor)
NOTE
If the shaft is turned by hand, a clutch will not fully disengage upon reaching its stop position. Where a procedure calls for disengagement, rotate the clutch to its stop position, apply a screwdriver to the stop lug and turn the disk in the normal direction of shaft rotation until the latch lever seats in its notch in the disk. As a reminder, the word 'LATCHED" follows instructions to disengage the clutches.
f. MANUAL OPERATION.
(1) To manually operate the Printer, place it in the stop condition as instructed in paragraph 4-3.c.(2) above. Momentarily permit armature to move to its unattracted (rearward) position to trip the selector clutch. Slowly rotate the main shaft clockwise (as viewed from left) until all push levers have moved under their respective selector levers(see page4-27).Using spring hook, strip the push levers from under the selector levers corresponding to the spacing elements of the code combination to be set up. Then continue to rotate the shaft until the proper condition is set up or the character is cleared through the Printer.
(2) On Model 32 Printers, the selector levers are numbered 1 through 5 from left to right. To set up the letter" Y", for example, whose teletypewriter code combination is 1-3-5, strip the push levers from the No. 2 and No. 4 selector levers. On Model 33 Printers, the selector levers are numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 6, 8 from left to right. To set up the letter 'Y", for example, whose eight-level code combination is 1--45-78, strip the push levers from the No. 2, 3 and 6 selector levers.

SECTION 5
DISASSEMBLY AND REASSEMBLY
0-1. GENERAL,
a. The disassembly procedure given in this section will break the Printer, Tape Reader and Tape Punch, down into its major assemblies and mechanisms. If further disassembly is required, refer to Bulletin 1184B which shows detailed arrangements of parts. Where it will help in determining their location, the numbers of the parts are given in the instructions.
b. NOTE: Most of the mechanisms are mounted on castings by self-tapping screws. Therefore, to remove the mechanisms, do not remove the screws — merely loosen them unless specifically instructed otherwise.
c. Retaining rings are made of spring steel and have a tendency to release suddenly. To avoid loss of these rings when removing them, proceed as follows:
Hold retaining ring to prevent its rotating. Place blade of screwdriver in one of ring's slots. Rotate screwdriver in direction to increase diameter. Ring will come off easily in fingers without flying.
d. Before beginning disassembly, remove connectors from external receptacles (power source, Data Set, etc.).
a. Remove paper and spindle. Remove volume control knob (if used) by pulling frontward,. Remove name plate by pulling it frontward. Remove platen knob by pulling it to left.
b. Remove seven 125002 mounting screws — four in front, three in rear of cover (See Figure 5-9),
c. Lift cover from base.
d. Remove external connections (signal line, etc.) from terminal board on call control assembly (Figure 5-4),
d. To replace cover, reverse procedure used to remove it. Make sure that keyboard, dial, etc., are properly aligned in holes provided.
5-3. PRINTER ASSEMBLY.
a. TO REMOVE PRINTER ASSEMBLY (Figure 5-2),
(1) Remove printer plug (marked P) and distributor plug (marked D) from their receptacles on call control assembly. Remove ground cable from ground tab on call control assembly.
(2) Insert screwdriver in slot in 180977 H-plate (Figure 5-3) and push to left against pressure of spring until plate is disengaged from universal lever. Remove H-plate,
(3) Lift printer assembly from sub-base.
(4) To replace printer assembly, reverse procedure used to remove it. Make sure that assembly is properly seated on rubber isolators (Figure 5-8) and 180831 answer-back lever (Figure 5-3) is under and aligned with HERE IS key lever. Receptacles on attendant set are marked D and P.
b. TO REMOVE RIBBON MECHANISM. (Figure 5-3).
(1) Remove ribbon by removing two ribbon spools and disengaging ribbon from ribbon guide and 181116 reverse arm.
(2) Loosen two 152893 mounting screws and lift ribbon mechanism from carriage.
(3) To replace ribbon mechanism, reverse procedure used to remove it.
c. TO REMOVE PLATEN MECHANISM (Figure 5-4.)
(1) Remove 119651 retaining ring and 90615 spring from line feed linkage.
(2) Disengage 181176 link from 181168 bell-crank,
(3) Loosen four 181242 mounting screws in two platen side plates.
(4) Lift platen mechanism from Printer assembly.
(5) To replace platen mechanism, reverse procedure used to remove it.
d. TO REMOVE CARRIAGE MECHANISM (Figure 5-3).
(1) Unhook carriage return spring from carriage.
(2) Loosen two 180798 mounting screws in spacing pulley's mounting bracket. Rotate and remove bracket.
(3) Loosen two 180798 mounting screws in spacing drum's mounting bracket. Remove mounting bracket.
(4) Disengage spacing belt from pulley on spacing drum.
(5) Remove front carriage shaft by sliding to right.
(6) Disengage rollers from rear rail and lift carriage from printer assembly.
(7) To replace carriage, reverse procedure used to remove it and observe following precautions,
(a) Make sure nylon slide guides engage proper associated code bars (Figure 5-6).
(b) Make sure two rear rollers engage carriage rear rail (Figure 5-6).
e. TO REMOVE SELECTOR MECHANISM (Figure 5-5),
(1) Lock armature inspacing position to prevent it from pulling selector levers from their guide.
(2) Remove 150040 mounting screw with lock washer from selector cam-clutch.
(3) Holding levers away, remove selector cam-clutch from main shaft by pulling to left and rotating back and forth,
(4) From under side of base, remove 180798 mounting screw from bottom of left platen support post. Loosen 180798 screw intop of post and remove it and dashpot cylinder.
(5) Loosen 181246 mounting screw in 180648 follower arm. Slide arm off trip shaft.
(6) Loosen 180798 mounting screw and remove 180682 upstop bracket. Tighten screw to secure 181230 retaining plate.
(7) Remove three 180675 mounting screws with 180676 speed nuts from selector right plate.
(8) Loosen screws and remove two leads from selector magnet.
(9) Remove selector mechanism.
(10) To replace selector mechanism reverse the procedure used to remove it with following precautions:
Make sure blocking levers are properly seated in guide slots infront 180950 code bar tie bracket (see Figure 5-7).
To prevent bending right plate, make sure it is properly fitted around 181006 bearing on main shaft.
f. TO REMOVE CODE BAR MECHANISM (Figure 5-6).
(1) Loosen four 180798 mounting screws, remove four 180925 clamps and lift code bar mechanism from frame.
(2) To replace code bar mechanism, reverse procedure used to remove it and observe the following precautions:
(a) Make sure function levers are inproper slots in code bars.
(b) Make sure code bars' reset extensions are to right of 180928 code bar reset bail and in proper slots of guide.
(c) Make sure both right and left 180920 guide shafts are fully seated in their mountings.
(d) Make sure 181070 space suppression lever is to left of 180947 print suppression code bar.
(e) Make sure 180752 print suppression latch lever fits into slot of 180923 bracket mounted on the rear tie bracket.
g. TO REMOVE TRIP SHAFT MECHANISM (Figure 5-4).
(1) Loosen four 180798 mounting screws in left and right mounting brackets. Push inwards on brackets and lift mechanism from casting.
(2) To replace trip shaft mechanism, reverse procedure used to remove it.
h. TO REMOVE FUNCTION BOX MECHANISM (Figure 5-4).
(1) Unhook 74702 spring (connects to 180928 code bar reset bail) from 180773 plate (see Figure 5-7).
(2) Loosen two 180798 mounting screws and remove two 180796 clamp plates (see Figure 5-8),
(3) Lift function box mechanism from base.
(4) To replace function box mechanism, reverse procedure used to remove it with following precaution:
Function levers should be inproper slots and aligned with their respective pawls.
k, TO REMOVE DISTRIBUTOR TRIP SHAFT MECHANISM (Figure 5-7).
(1) Remove 119649 retaining ring from post connecting links to each of following cam follower levers: 180985, 180820, and 180821.
(2) Unhook five springs from 180988 spring bracket,
(3) Loosen two 180798 mounting screws and remove two 180972 buffer clamps.
(4) Remove distributor trip shaft mechanism from base.
(5) To replace distributor trip shaft mechanism, reverse procedure used to remove it.
1, TO REMOVE MOTOR (Figure 5-8).
(1) Remove four 180798 mounting screws and two motor clamps,
(2) Disengage motor belt from gear-pulley mounted on motor housing.
(3) Loosen 180798 screw in motor-start relay.
(4) Remove motor, motor capacitor, start relay and associated wiring.
(5) To replace motor, reverse procedure used to remove it.
m. TO REMOVE FUNCTION ROCKERSHAFT MECHANISM (Ficure 5-7)
(1) Remove 119651 retaining rings from posts at rear of 180769 left and 180770 right function bail's drive links.
(2) Loosen two 180798 mounting screws and remove two 180797 plates on left and right rocker shaft bearings,
(3) Lift rocker shaft mechanism from base.
(4) To replace rocker shaft mechanism, reverse procedure used to remove it.
n. TO REMOVE CODE BAR RESET BAIL (Figure 5-6),
(1) From under side of base, remove 153841 Screw with lock washer and 181247 screw from two 180930 bearings (see Figure 5-7),
(2) Lift 180928 code bar reset bail from casting.
(3) To replace code bar reset bail, reverse procedure used to removeit. In replacing 153841 screw, make sure it passes through 180776 spring bracket before entering bearing.
o. TO REMOVE SPACING DRUM MECHANISM (Figure 5-7),
(1) Remove 119653 retaining ring from top of spacing drum and remove drum.
(2) From under side of base, remove the 112626 nut and lock washer from lower end of Spacing drum shaft.
(3) Lift spacing drum shaft from base.
(4) To replace spacing drum mechanism, reverse procedure used to remove it.
p. TO REMOVE CARRIAGE DRIVE BAIL (Figure 5-3),
(1) Loosen 180798 mounting screw and remove 181230 clamp plate at left end of carriage drive bail (see Figure 5-6).
(2) Remove 119651 retaining ring and felt washer at right end of bail.
(3) Remove drive bail by sliding it to left.
(4) To replace drive bail assembly, reverse procedure used to remove it.
q. TO REMOVE SPACING PAWL MECHANISM (Figure 5-6),
(1) Unhook 76397 spring from 181067 feed pawl, 70466 spring from 181065 check pawl, and 70388 spring trom 181319 carriage return lever.
(2) Remove 119649 retaining rings from 181314 carriage return link and 181068 spacing lever,
(3) Loosen two 180798 mounting screws.
(4) Lift spacing pawl mechanism from casting.
(5) To replace spacing pawl mechanism, reverse the procedure used to remove it.
r. TO REMOVE FUNCTION LEVER MECHANISM (Figure 5-7).
(1) Loosen three 180798 mounting screws and rotate levers' pivot shaft so flat side is vertical.
(2) To remove any function lever unhook its spring and disengage lever from pivot shaft.
(3) To remove lever's pivot shaft, remove two 180797 clamp plates and 180795 spring bracket. Lift out shaft with two drive links attached.
(4) To replace function lever mechanism, reverse the procedure used to remove it.

9-4. KEYBOARD AND CALL CONTROL ASSEMBLY.
a. TO REMOVE KEYBOARD AND CALL CONTROL ASSEMBLY (Figure 5-9).
(1) Remove keyboard plug (marked K) from receptacle on call control assembly (Figure 5-2).
(2) Remove four 121551 mounting screws and remove call control assembly.
(3) Disengage keyboard cable from 182531 cable clips on sub-base.
(4) Loosen two 180798 keyboard mounting screws. Slide keyboard assembly to rear and lift it from sub-base,
(5) To replace keyboard assembly, reverse procedure used to remove it.
CAUTION
Make sure that plug is mated with similarly designated receptacle.
b, TO REMOVE KEYBOARD COVER (Figure 9-9),
(1) Remove 119652 retaining ring from each side of keyboard cover.
(2) Disengage cover from right and left side brackets,
(3) Lift cover off keys.
(4) To replace keyboard cover, reverse procedure used to remove it.
c. TO REMOVE MISCELLANEOUS PARTS (Figure 5-10).
(1) To remove any keylever, depress front end of 180086 universal lever. Depress keylever, disengage it from front or rear guide slot, and lift it out of keyboard frame. Note that certain levers have compression springs on their lower stems so that the springs may be properly replaced during reassembly.
(2) To remove space bar mechanism, remove space bar with attached keylever. Bow 180056 space lever and disengage it from two 180055 space keylevers. Disengage space keylevers from guide slots and remove them from frame. Note position of compression springs on keylever's lower stems so that they canbe properly replaced during reassembly.
(3) Code bars may be removed after all key-levers are removed. Disengage bars from T-levers and lift out of keyboard frame.
(4) To remove keyboard contact mechanism, remove right side bracket by snapping it off frame. Remove contact mechanism. Note positions of 180031 compression springs so that they may be properly replaced during reassembly. Remove contact mechanism.
(5) To remove two T-lever shafts, spread frame and lift out. To remove T-levers, remove 119653 retaining rings and slide levers off their seats.
(6) To replace miscellaneous parts, reverse procedure used to remove them.
The tape reader feed magnet and trip magnet operate under high voltage. Precautionary measures should be taken whenever power to the reader is turnedon. High voltage will persist from the power pack untilapproximately 10 seconds after disconnect.
a. The disassembly procedure given in this section will break the Tape Reader down into its major assemblies and mechanisms. If further disassembly is required, refer to Bulletin 1184B which shows detailed arrangements of parts. Where it willhelp in determining their location, the numbers of the parts are given in the instructions.
b. The Tape Reader and Cover are assembled at the factory.
c. The 183046 Tape Reader Cover is fastened to the printer cover with two sets of 181244 Screws, 7002 Washers, 124177 Lock Washers, and 3598 Nuts.
(1) The two covers are assembled with the bottom surface of the covers flush with each other.
(2) There shall be equal clearance on three sides between the top plate assembly and the 183046 Tape Reader Cover. Position the 183047 Tape Reader Base with its three mounting screws friction tight.
d. Assembly of Reader Base to Printer Base (Figure 5-11).
(1) The 183047 Reader Base is fastened to the printer base with two 181244 Mounting Screws "A" and 153538 Mounting Screw, 7002 Washer, 124177 Lock Washer, and 3598 Nut "B". For assembly, the following procedure must be adhered to:
(2) Insert and tighten mounting screws "A" with the 183047 Reader base held firmly against side of printer base.
(3) Assemble and tighten mounting screw
(4) Todisassemble above items reverse the assembly procedure.
e. To Remove Reader Cable Assembly
(1) On Model 32 ASR, remove tape reader (marked R 1); on Model 33 ASR, remove tape reader plug (marked 6).
(2) Remove plug from power pack.
(3) Removetwo 182726 Push-On Terminals from the tabs of the reader contact assembly.
(4) Remove any cable clamps necessary.
(5) Remove five 121551 Call Control Bracket Mounting Screws.
(6) Lift call controlunit and remove reader cable which is located under the call control unit.
(7) Replace call control unit.
(8) Remove three 181244 Mounting Screws, 7002 Washers, and 124177 Lock Washers, from reader mounting bracket.
(9) Lift reader cable and assembly out.
(10) To replace Reader Cable Assembly, reverse procedure used to remove it.
f. To Remove Contact Block Cable Assembly.
(1) On Model 32 ASR, remove tape reader plug (marked R 1); on Model 33, remove tape reader plug (marked 6).
(2) Remove plug from power pack.
(3) Remove two push-on terminals from tabs of the reader contact assembly.
(4) Remove any cable clamps necessary.
(5) Remove five 121551 Call Control Bracket Mounting Screws.
(6) Lift callcontrol unitand remove reader cable which is located under the call control unit.
(7) Replace call control unit.
(8) Remove two push-onterminals from tabs of the feed magnet coil.
(9) Remove the 3598 Nut on the 183026 Contact Block Shaft andslide shaft until it is out of the body hole of the 183036 Mounting Plate.
(10) Pull the 183049 Contact Block towards the front of the unit until the contact block mounting slots are disengaged from the 183048 Top Plate Bracket Mounting slots.
(11) Remove the 183049 Contact Biock and the cable assembly.
(12) To replace contact block cable assembly, reverse procedure used to remove it.
g. To Remove Reader Cable Assembly.
(1) Remove contact block cable assembly.
(2) Remove the 182726 Push-On Terminal tab of 183050 Common Bar.
(3) Remove all other terminals with Extraction Tool No. 182697.
(4) To replace reader cable assembly, reverse procedure used to remove it.
h. To Remove Sensing Pin Assembly.
(1) Remove two 151152 Mounting Screws, 110743 Locx Washers, and 104807 Flat Washers, which mount the 183035 Sensing Pin Guide.
(2) Remove sensing pin assembly.
(3) To replace sensing pin assembly, reverse procedure used to remove it.
i. To Remove the 182139 Feed Magnet Assembly.
(1) Remove contact block assembly.
(2) Remove sinsing pin assembly.
(3) Unhook the 90517 Detent Lever Spring from the 183023 Detent Bracket.
(4) Unhook the 114107 Blocking Pawl Spring from the 183020 Blocking Pawl Bracket.
(5) Remove three magnet bracket mounting screws. (One 151152 Screw, 110743 Lock Washer, and two 181241 Screws. )
(6) Slide the 183011 Feed Pawl Stud out of engagement with the 183016 Blocking Pawl.
(7) Remove feed magnet assembly.
(8) To replace feed magnet assembly, reverse procedure used to remove it.
To Remove Feed Wheel Top Plate Assembly.
(1) Remove contact block and cable assembly.
(2) Remove sensing pin assembly.
(3) Remove the 182139 Feed Magnet Assembly.
(4) Unlatch the 183032 Tape Lid.
(5) Remove detent bracket 181241 Mounting Screw and feed wheel shaft 3598 Nut, and 124177 Lock Washer.
(6) Remove feed wheel top plate assembly.
(7) To replace feed wheel top plate assembly, reverse procedure used to remove it.
To Remove Reader Feed Contact Assembly
(1) Remove two push-on 182726 Terminals of the reader cable.
(2) Remove two 152893 Reader Feed Contact Mounting Screws, 104752 Flat Washer, and 110743 Lock Washers.
(3) Remove reader feed contact assembly.
(4) To replace reader feed contact assembly, reverse procedure used to remove it.
To Remove Reader Trip Magnet Assembly
(1) Remove reader feed contact assembly.
(2) On Model 32 ASR Units, remove plug P and with Extractor Tool No. 182697 remove terminals 4 and 5 (also terminals 1 and 6 on units with answer back).
(3) On Model 33 ASR Units, remove plug 4 and with Extractor Tool No. 182697 remove terminals 11 and 12 (also terminals 4 and 5 on units with answer back).
(4) To replace reader trip magnet assembly, reverse procedure used to remove it.
m. The Power Pack Assembly (Figure 2-11.) is snapped on (with two clips assembled to the power pack), to the front panel of the printer stand. Position power pack so it shall be spaced approximately 1/2 inch from the right panel of the printer stand.

5-6. TAPE PUNCH
a. The disassembly procedure given in this section will break the Tape Punch down into its major assemblies and mechanisms. If further disassembly is required, refer to Bulletin 1184B which shows detailed arrangements of parts. Where it will help indetermining their location, the numbers of the parts are given in the instruc-
b. Base, Cover Assembly (Figure 5-12).
The 182913 Tape Punch Base mounts to the left rear side of the Model 32 or Model 33 Printer Base with three 153538 Screws, six 7002 Flat Washers, three 124177 Lock Washers and three 3598 Nuts, placed in the three slots located in both bases. Line up the back end of the tape punch base with the back end of the printer base, engage the locating tabs on the tape punch base with the printer base and tighten screws. To disassemble base from printer base, reverse procedure used to assemble it to printer base.
c. To Remove Punch Block Assembly
(1) Loosen and remove the two 153817 Mounting Screws, and 110743 Lock Washers.
(2) Slide the punch block assembly forward until the tongue in the punch block holder and the punches disengage the groove in the 182903 Tape Punch casting and 182813 Code Levers respectively.
d. To Assemble Punch Block Assembly (1) Position the slots in the punches so that they face the guide pin. The bottom of the punches should be in line and in a position that approximates their position when on the tape punch,
(2) Line up the punch slots with their levers and reverse the procedure in paragraph c. e. To Remove Tape Chute Assembly
(1) Mark the groove where the tension spring end is positioned (pencil or other suitable mark).
(2) Unhook the 72468 Tension Spring, remove the 182936 Arm with bushing and then loosen and remove 182845 Mounting Screw.
(3) Remove the 181244 Mounting Screw from the tape chute assembly.
(4) To replace tape chute assembly reverse the above procedure making sure the spring is positioned in the marked groove of the arm with bracket.
f. Punch Pawl and Lever Assembly 
(1) To provide easy disassembly and reassembly of the punch pawl and lever on to its 182824 Mounting Post always assemble the ball of the lever into the socket of the pawl and keep the two joined together by its 42661 spring. The tension of the spring will keep the two together in one plane, thereby permitting easy handling.
Tape Punch Base and Cover
(2) Where the spring does not supply a force to keep the two together apply finger pressure on the ends of the levers in the same direction as the spring. This procedure simulates the spring and also provides for easy handling.
(3) Following either of these procedures will allow the pawl, lever and spring to be easily disassembled or assembled.
(4) Once assembled to the unit the slotted plate of the post, bracket and plate assembly keeps the pawl,
g. To Remove Post, Bracket and Plate Assembly.
(1) Never disassemble the post, bracket and plate assembly prior to removing the pawl, lever and spring combinations. The slotted plate keeps the balland socket of the lever and pawl in full engagement.
(2) Prior to removing the 182821 Post, 182893 Bracket and 182822 Plate, always remove the pawl, lever and spring combinations. To remove, loosenand remove the 181244 Screw. To assemble, always mount the post bracket and lever combination in a plane. plate assembly before assembling the pawl, lever and spring combination. To position refer to adjustment section.
(1) Unhook sensing lever 182909 Spring and rotate sensing levers out of way. Loosen and remove the 181242 Screw and 3598 Nut.
(3) To assemble reverse the procedure used to remove it. However before tightening the screw, push the plate downward to take up all the play. Viewing the tape punch from the left side, position the plate in a horizontal to a slight counterclockwise direction from a horizontal plane as gaged by eye. Tighten screw and nut.
To Remove Pawl and Sensing Lever Guide
Remove the 182815 Sensing Lever Guide
i. To Remove Chad Chute Assembly
(1) Remove the 182915 Extension. To remove the 182908 Chad Chute Assembly, loosen and remove the 151152 Screws and 110743 Lock Washer.
(2) To assemble place the 0.010 inch lips on the top surface of die plate and 0. 040 inch lip on the front face of the die plate. Line up the oblong holes of the plate with the holes in the punch block holder. Apply finger pressure on top of the chad chute assembly towards punch block assembly, assemble and tighten the 151152 Screws and 110743 Lock Washers. Reassemble the 182915 Extension.
NOTE: The assembly procedure is described for the following items. To disassemble these items reverse the assembly procedure.
j. Tape Punch Drive Parts Assembly (Figure 5-13).
(1) With the printer function shaft in the most forward position assemble the 182898 Arm on the function shaft. Lineup the hole in the arm with the threads in the function shaft. Push down on the arm in line with the threads, assemble the 181231 Screw and tighten.
(2) Assemble the 182895 Plate w/bushing w/post and the 181245 Screw and 76461 Flat Washer.
(3) Center the screw head that secures the arm to the function shaft in the opening located in the plate w/bushing w/post and tighten screw.
(4) Assemble the 182902 Spacer, the 182900 Link w/post and 181249 Screw. With finger pressure applied to the link w/post in line with the function shaft, place the link into the bushing. After releasing finger pressure, the link w/post should spring back to its initial position. After releasing finger pressure, the link w/post should spring back to its initial position. If it does not spring back, loosen the link w/post screw, and the 180798 Screw on top of the 181045 Platen Mounting Post. Position post to satisfy this condition.
(1) The tape punch unit mounts on the left side of the Model 32 or Model 33 printer base casting with three screws and a nut plate.
(2) To assemble, manually set up the printer so that the 0, 1. 2, 3. 4. and 5 (in a five level printer) and the 0. 1. 2, 3. 4, 5. 6, and 7 (in eight level printer) code bars are in the marking position. Place the code extensions in their respective code bar slots and the tape punch casting on the carriage rail. (The left end of the carriage rail protrudes 0.0189 inches nominally beyond the outside surface of the printer base casting's left front wall. If this condition is not present on the printer, loosen the carriage rail clamps and collars and move the carriage rail to the left so that the right endof the rail is flush as gaged by eye with the right vertical surface of the "V" groove. The rail on the left end will protrude 0. 189 inches beyond the left surface on the left front mounting wall. This provides the tape punch casting with anominal 0. 094 inch rail to engage and locate from.) Place the nut plate on the inside surface and in line with the slots of the front wall of the printer's base casting. Assemble the middle screw first, then the rear screwand the most forward screwlast. Tighten the screws in the same sequence. Assemble the drive link, retainer and the tension spring. l. Lid Assembly (Figure 5-15). (1) A 182912 Lid, four 182919 Buttons, a 182917 Spring and a 182932 Self Locking Nut form the lid assembly.
(2) To assemble, place the buttons into the lid holes.
(3) Engage each spring leaf with the button slot. Place the spring on the base and captivate with the self locking nut.
m. Cover Assembly (Figure 5-16).
(1) The tape punch unit cover consists of a 182922 Left Cover and 182921 Right Cover Assembly and the lid assembly.
(2) To assemble, secure the right cover to the left cover with three screws (two 182916 Screws and one 180798 Screw) thereby forming the left cover and right cover assembly. Secure this assembly to the printer cover with six screws, twelve flat washers, six lock washers, and six nuts. (Place the screw heads on the inside wall of the right cover.)
(3) Snap the lid assembly into place through the bosses located in both halves of the cover.
(4) This assembly plus the printer lid forms the cover for the five level and eight level automatic send-receive sets.
(5) Assemble the cover to the printer base in the same manner as in the send and receive sets.

SECTION 6
LUBRICATION
6-1. GENERAL.
a. This section provides instructions for lubricating the Printer, Tape Reader and Tape Punch. The general lubrication areas are illustrated by photographs. The specific points to receive lubricant are indicated by line drawings with text, which follow the photographs. The drawings are keyed to the photographs by paragraph numbers.

6-2. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS.
a. Thoroughly lubricate the Printer, Tape Reader or Tape Punch, but avoid over-lubrication that might permit the lubricant to drip or be thrown on adjacent parts.
b. Saturate all felt washers and oilers with oil, and apply oil to each end of all bearings.

6-3. LUBRICANTS.
Use the following lubricants:
Oil - Teletype KS7470 Oil
Grease - Teletype KS7471 Grease
Grease - (Lubriplate 105)
Teletype 108805 Grease

6-4. LUBRICATING INTERVALS.
Lubricate the Printer, Tape Reader or Tape Punch, before putting it in service or prior to storage. After a short period of service, relubricate it to make sure no areas have been missed. Thereafter, lubricate it at regular intervals as indicated below:
a. The instructions that accompany the line drawings consistsof an abbreviated direction (explained below), the specific lubrication point (e.g., pivot), and the part (e.g., carriage drive bail).
b. The points are divided into nine categories according to the type of lubrication they receive. These are indicated by the abbreviated directions on the line drawings as follows:
a. This section explains the operation of the Model 32 and 33 Printers, Paragraph 7-2 7-2, CODE (Figures 7-1 and 7-2). describes the code used by the Printers to transmit and receive messages, Paragraph a. GENERAL, 7-3 outlines in general terms the overall operation. Paragraph 7-4 and up explains in detail the operation of the components that make up  the Set. 
(1) The Teletypewriters transmit and receive messages by means of a binary permutation code (Figure 7-1.a.). The characters making up the messages—letters, numerals, symbols, functions, etc.—are represented by prearranged combinations of binary intelligence elements (also referred to as levels or bits), each of which may be in one of two states (on or off, etc.). Depending on whether a five-, six-, seven-, or eight-level code is employed, each combination consists of five, six, seven, or eight intelligence elements. The total number of permutations available in a given code is equal to two to then power where n is the number of intelligence elements. For example, in a six-level code, there are two to the sixth power, or 64, permutations.
(2) In the various stages of acommunication system using teletypewriter equipment, the above code may occur in a number of different forms, including parallel or sequential electrical pulses, mechanical positions of parts, code holes in paper tape, and tone frequencies. For transmission purposes, it is placed in an electrical form referred to as a start-stop signaling code or simply a teletypwriter code (Figure 7-1.b.). The intelligence elements are applied sequentially to a signal line as current or no-current time intervals. Intervals during which current flows in the signal line are referred to as marking elements and during which no current flows as spacing elements, To insure Synchronization between the transmitting and receiving equipment, a start element which is always spacing is added at the beginning of each combination of intelligence elements, and a stop element which is always marking is added at the end.
(3) In different signaling codes the length of the stop element may vary. For example, in the code illustrated in Figure 7-1.b., the length of the stop element is 1.5 times the other elements. Thus, the transmission of a character requires 7.5 units of time. It is therefore said to have a 7.5 unit transmission pattern,

b, FIVE-LEVEL CODE—MODEL 32,
(1) The code accommodated by the 32 Printers is illustrated in Figure T - Since it has five intelligence elements and its stop element is 1.5 units of time, it is a five-level code with a 7-5 unit transmission pattern, It has two to the fifth power, or 32, available permutations.
(2) To accommodate more than 32 characters, a letters-figures shift is designed into the Printers, This is similar to the lower and upper case of a typewriter and permits each code combination, excluding the two used to shift the equipment, to represent two characters.
(3) A typical character arrangement is shown on the chart in Figure 7-1.c. The black circles represent marking elements, the blank Squares spacing elements. When the letters code combination (12345) is transmitted, it conditions all Printers connected to the circuit to print, at the receipt of all following code combinations, the characters in the letters (lower case) line on the chart. Similarly, when the figures code combination (12-45) is transmitted, it conditions the Printers to print the characters or perform functions in the figure (upper case) line on the chart.

c. EIGHT-LEVEL CODE—MODEL 33 (Figure 7-2).
(1) The data interchange code accommodated by the Model 33 Printer is illustrated in Figure 7-2, Since it has eight intelligence elements and its stop element is 2 units of time, it is an eight-level code with an eleven-unit transmission pattern. However, at the present it utilizes only the first seven intelligence elements, the eighth always being transmitted as marking. Thus, it has two to the seventh power, or 128, available permutations, Of these combinations, 64 are assigned to printing characters, The rest are devoted to control (non-printing) characters or are unassigned.
(2) The character arrangement for the data interchange code is shown on the chart in Figure 7-2. The black circles represent marking elements, the blank squares spacing elements. The main block gives the arrangements of elements No. 1 through No. 5. The four smaller blocks at the right give the arrangements of elements No. 6 and No. 7 for the three rows of characters as indicated by the arrows. For keyboard transmission, two shift keys labeled CONTROL and SHIFT are used as covered in paragraph 7-5.d.

7-3, GENERAL OPERATION (Figures 7-3 and 7-4).
a. Figure 7-3 is a pictorial schematic of the basic Printer's operation. Figure 7-4 shows the sequence of events involved in receiving a character.
b. The middle portion of the Figure 7-3 illustrates power distribution. A.C. electrical power is applied to a motor through a motor switch which may be manually or automatically controlled. The motor converts the electrical power to rotary motion which is transferred by intermediate drive parts to a distributor Snait, The latter main shaft and, through a cam-clutch, provides motion to a distributor mechanism. The main shaft, through three cam-clutches, distributes motion to a selector mechanism, a code bar mechanism, a function mechanism, a spacing mechanism, and a printing carriage.
c. The upper portion of the diagram illustrates transmission which is effected by anoperator depressing the keys of a keyboard, Assume that the "D' key is manually depressed. A code bar mechanism converts this selective action to mechanical positions corresponding to the code combinations representing the letter "D" (1--4-). These positions, in turn, set up the code combination in a set of keyboard contacts. The distributor then translates the position of the contacts to a corresponding signaling code combination and applies it to the transmission facilities which carry it to distant stations. Since a local selector magnet drive is connected to the transmission facilities, it also receives the signals.
d. The lower portion of the diagram illustrates reception and printing. Assume that the signaling code combination representing the letter "D" (1--4-), which may have been originated either remotely or by the local keyboard, is received from the transmission facilities by the selector magnet driver. The driver converts it to a form suitable to operate the selector mechanism. The selector then translates it to mechanical positions which are transferred to the code bar mechanism.
e, Under the control of the code bar mechanism, rotary and vertical positioning mechanisms on the carriage position a typewheel so as to select the letter 'D" embossed onits surface. A printing mechanism, by means of a print hammer, drives the typewheel against an inked ribbon and the paper to print the character. A ribbon mechanism feeds the ribbon and reverses its direction of feed when a spool is depleted.
f, Controlled by the code bar mechanism, a function mechanism enables the Printer to perform functions supplementary to printing. The standard functions consist of space (SP), carriage return (CR), line feed (LF), blank (BL), bell, and, in the case of Model 32 Printers, letters (LTRS) and figures (FIGS). In response to the reception of LTRS or FIGS, the function mechanism conditions the code bar mechanism to cause printing in the lower or upper case, respectively. It also causes the code bar mechanism to suppress printing on receipt of all functions.
g, A spacing mechanism positions the carriage so that the characters are properly located horizontally on the paper. It spaces the carriage each time printing occurs and when the SP code combination is received, The function mechanism suppresses spacing on the receipt of all functions except SP. At the receipt of the CR code combination, the function mechanism causes the spacing mechanism to return the carriage to the left margin so that a new printing line can be started.
h. A paper feed mechanism positions the paper vertically so that the characters are properly located in lines on the paper. At the receipt of the LF code combination, the function mechanism causes the line feed mechanism to raise the paper to the next printing line.

7-4, POWER DISTRIBUTION (Figure 7-5).
a. MOTOR.
(1) Rotary mechanical motion for the Printers is generated by synchronous motors. The motors are described and illustrated in "Description" (Section 4).
(2) The motor ordinarily used on Model 33 Printers has a run winding and a start winding connected in parallel (see appropriate schematic wiring diagram). The start winding is in series with an electrolytic capacitor and the contacts of a current-sensitive start relay.
(3) When the motor circuit is closed, the initial surge of current energizes the relay coil which closes the relay contacts. The magnetic flux produced by the operating and start windings starts the rotor turning. As the rotor accelerates, the current through the windings, capacitor and relay decreases. When it drops to a predetermined level, the relay coil opens the contacts and removes the start coil from the circuit. Using the operating coil alone, the motor continues to accelerate until it reaches synchronous speed.
(4) The motor ordinarily used on Model 32 Printers is similar, but has a run capacitor.
b. DISTRIBUTION (Figure 7-5).
(1) The rotary motion produced by the motor is transferred through a motor pinion, an intermediate gear-pulley and a motor belt to a distributor gear-pulley. The latter drives a main shaft gear and also a distributor cam-clutch which provides motion for the keyboard and distributor mechanism.
(2) The main shaft, through three cam-clutches, distributes motion to the various mechanisms on the printer assembly (excluding the distributor). A selector cam-clutch provides motion for the selector. A code bar cam-clutch drives the code bar mechanism, and a function cam-clutch furnishes motion to a function rocker shaft, a function stripper bail, a carriage drive bail, and a print-suppression latch.
c, CAM-CLUTCHES (Figure 7-6).
(1) The operation of all four cam-clutches are basically the same. A typical cam-clutch is shown in Figure 7-6, in unison with a shaft. In their stop position, a trip lever and a latch lever hold a shoe lever, two shoes, a cam disk and cam sleeve stationary.
(3) When the trip lever moves away from the shoe lever, the latter under spring pressure moves away from a stop lug on the cam disk. Through two lugs, the shoe lever expands the clutch until they contact the notched inner surface of the drum. The drum causes the shoes to start to rotate, and the shoes, in turn, through a lug on the cam disk, rotate the disk and the attached cam sleeve. The clutch is now engaged as shown in Figure 7-6, and the cam sleeve rotates in unison with the shaft.
(4) When the trip lever moves to its stop position, it is struck by the shoe lever. The cam disk continues to rotate until the latch lever seats in its notch, and the shoe lever and stop lug are pinched together by the trip lever and latch lever. A spring holds the shoes together so they no longer contact the drum. Thus, the cam-clutch is again disengaged as described in paragraph 7-4.c.(2).

7-5, TRANSMISSION.
a. GENERAL
Transmission of messages is accomplished by an operator selectively depressing the keys and space bar of the keyboard in Same manner as in typing. The downward movement is translated by a code bar mechanism into mechanical arrangement corresponding to the code combination representing the character on the keytop. The mechanical arrangements set up the code combinations in a set of keyboard contacts. A universal mechanism trips a distributor cam-clutch, and a distributor mechanism then translates these positions to a corresponding start-stop signal for application to the transmission facilities. Par. 7-5.b. and c. cover transmission on Model 32 Printers, Par. 7-5.d. explains how it differs on the Model 33.

b. KEYBOARD.
(1) In conjunction with a distributor mechanism, the keyboard provides facilities for transmitting messages by the manual operation of a group of keys. The Model 32 and 33 keyboards are described and illustrated in "Description" (Section 1).
(2) Code Bar Mechanism (Figure 7-7).
(a) For each intelligence element of the code, there is a code bar sub-mechanism which consists of a front bar, a rear bar, a tie link and two T-levers (Figure 7-7). The mechanisms are numbered 1 through 5 from rear to front according to the corresponding code elements, In addition, there is a universal mechanism consisting of one bar, a tie link and two T-levers (Figure 7-8).
(b) The bars have slots in their top edges which codes them so they are selectively depressed by the keys' keylevers, Each mechanism has a marking and a spacing position. In the marking position,the front bar is down, the rear bar is up, and the right T-lever is in the clockwise position. The spacing position is the opposite: front bar up, rear bar down, and right T-lever in counterclockwise position.
(c) The two bars in each mechanism are complementary coded so that, at any keylever position, where one has a slot, the other is solid. When a key is depressed, it is returned to its up position by a leaf spring. However, the code combination representing the key's character remains in the code bar mechanisms. When a new key is depressed, only the mechanisms whose code elements differ from those of the preceding combination are operated as illustrated in the following example:
(d) Assume that the letter "S" has just been transmitted. The "S" code combination, 1-3--, remains in the code bar mechanisms, Now assume that the "D" key whose combination is 1--4- is depressed. In the case of the No. 1 code bar mechanism, the keylever encounters a slot in the rear bar, and the mechanism remains marking. In the case of No. 2 and 5 mechanism, the lever encounters a slot in the front bar and they remain spacing. In the case of the No. 3 mechanism, the lever encounters a solid portion of the rear bar and shifts it to its spacing position. In a similar manner, the lever encounters the solid portion of the front bar of the No. 4 mechanism and shifts it to the marking position.
(e) Since each code combination is different and is locked in the code bar mechanisms (see par. 7-5.b.(3) (b) ), the complimentary coding of the bars serves as an interlock for the keylevers. When one keylever is depressed, another cannot be depressed because it will be blocked by the solid portion of one or more bars.
(3) Universal Mechanism (Figure 7-8).
(a) As a keylever nears the bottom of its travel, it depresses a code bar which is part of a universal code bar mechanism. The code bar, in turn, causes associated T-levers to pivot and a tie link to move to the left. After some free movement, the tie link encounters a tab On a non-repeat lever and pivots the latter to the left. The tab, in turn, pivots a latch lever which releases a universal lever. Under spring pressure, the universal lever moves up and lifts the non-repeat lever so that its tab is moved from between the universal tie link and the latch lever. Under spring pressure, the latch lever and non-repeat lever move back to the right to their unoperated position.
(b) In its up position, the universal lever locks the right intelligence T-levers in the positions set up by the keylever, permits a contact bail to pivot to its down position (see paragraph 7-5.b(4)), and through a trip linkage trips the distributor clutch (See paragraph 7-5.c.). Near the end of the distributor cycle, the trip linkage moves the universal lever back to its down position where it is latched by the latch lever.
(c) Should the keylever remain depressed veyond the end of the distributor cycie, when the universal lever moves to its down position, the non-repeat lever under spring tension moves down until Sai the link which is still in its ieft position. When the key-lever is finally released, the tie link moves back to the right and permits the non-repeat lever to move all the way down so that its tab is again between the tie link and the latch lever. The trip mechanism operates in this way to prevent the distributor clutch from being retripped when a keylever is held down.
(a) The code bar mechanisms set up the code combinations in a set of keyboard contacts. A contact wire is associated with each right T-lever excluding the universal. In the stop condition of the keyboard, a contact bail is held in its up position by the universal lever, and, in turn, holds the contact wires to the right away from the T-levers.
(b) When a keylever is depressed, a code combination is set up in the code bar mechanisms, The universal lever moves to its up position and permits the contact bail to pivot under spring pressure to its down position, The contact wires associated with the T-levers that are in the marking (clockwise) position are permitted under spring pressure to move to the left against a common terminal. Those associated with the T-levers that are in the acin (counterclockwise) position are held to the right away from the terminal. For example, if the "D' code combination (1--4-) is in the code bar mechanisms as described in paragraph 7-5.b.(2)(d), the No. 1 and No. 4 contact wires are against the terminal, and the No. 2, 3 and 5 are away from the terminal (see Figure 7-11).
(c) As covered in paragraph 7-5.c., the distributor mechanism converts these positions to start-stop signals. Near the end of the distributor cycle, the universal lever moves back to its down position and pivots the bail to its up position. The bail, in turn, cams the contact wires back to the right and holds them there in the stop position.
(5) Line Break - When a line break (BREAK) key is depressed, it pivots a T-lever which opens the break contact (see Figure 7-11). This action opens the signal line until the key is released.
(6) Repeat - To repeat the transmission of a character, its keylever is held down along with the repeat (RPT) keylever. The latter holds the non-repeat lever down where its tab remains between the tie link and the latch lever (see paragraph 7-5.b.(3) and Figure 7-8). The latch lever is held in its left position and does not latch the universal lever at the end of the cycle. The universal lever thus moves up and trips the distributor clutch causing the character to be retransmitted as long as the RPT key is depressed.

c. DISTRIBUTOR MECHANISM (Figures 7-10 and 7-11).
(1) The distributor mechanism converts the positions of the keyboard contacts to start-stop signals and applies them to the signal line. The mechanism receives rotary motion from a distributor gear-pulley attached to the drum of a distributor clutch. The clutch disk is connected to a distributor shaft. A brush holder mounted on the shaft carries two carbon brushes which are electrically connected by a spring and ride on an inner and outer disk, respectively. The disks are part of a printed circuit card that provides facilities for inter-connecting the distributor with other apparatus. The outer disk is divided into segments — ten for Model 33 Printers, 7 for Model 32. The segments correspond to the elements of the code described in paragraph 7-2.
(2) In the stop position, the distributor clutch is disengaged, and the outer brush rests on the stop segment. When a keylever is depressed, the proper code combination is set up in the keyboard contacts and the universal lever moves to its up position. The motion of the transfer lever is conveyed by an H-plate to a distributor trip linkage on the printer assembly. The trip linkage pivots a trip bail which carries a trip lever rearward out of the way of the distributor clutch's shoe lever. The clutch engages and rotates the shaft and brush holder. The outer brush passes over the segments on the outer disk in the following order: (1) start, No. 1 through No. 5 and stop for Model 32 Printers and (2) start, No. 1 through No. 8 and stop for Model 33. Near the end of the shaft's revolution, a roller on the clutch disk pivots a follower lever which moves the trip bail and lever frontwards, This motion is transferred through the trip linkage and H-plate to the universal lever which is moved to its down position where it is latched, When the clutch completes its revolution, the shoe lever strikes the trip lever, and the clutch disengages.
(3) The effect of the above operation is to apply a start-stop code combination to the signal line corresponding to the combination set up in the keyboard contacts. This can best be shown by an example. Figure 7-11 is a simplified schematic of a Model 32 distributor and keyboard contacts.
(4) In the stop position, the outer brush rests on the stop segment, and current flows in the signal circuit which is closed (the path being from one side of the line through the start segment, the inner disk, the brushes, the stop segment, the common terminal and the break contact to the other side of the line). that the "D" key is depressed. The 1--4 code combination is set up in the keyboard contacts.
(5) The distributor clutch is tripped, and the brush holder begins its revolution. While the brush is on the start segment, the circuit is open, no current flows, and a spacing element is transmitted. While it is on the No. 1 segment, the circuit is closed (the signal path being through the start segment, the inner disk, the brushes, the No. 1 segment, the closed No. 1 contact, the common terminal and the break contact); thus current flows, and a marking element is transmitted. While the brush is on the No. 2 and No. 3 segments, since the No. 2 and No. 3 contacts are open, the circuit is broken, no current flows, and spacing elements are transmitted. In a similar manner, a No. 4 marking element and a No. 5 spacing element transmitted. When the brush reaches the stop segment, the cam-clutch is disengaged and the line again becomes marking.

d. MODEL 33 (Figures 7-12 and 7-13).
(1) Transmission on Model 33 Printers is Similar to that on Model 32 except that facilities are provided on the keyboard and distributor to generate the eight-level data interchange code (see paragraph 7-2.c.) and the keyboard utilizes two shift keys. The key labeled "SHIFT" is used to generate the code combinations for the printing characters appearing on the upper keytops (e.g., "$" that appears above "4" on the keytop in Figure 7-12). The control (CTRL) key is used to generate the codes for the control characters appearing on the upper keytops (e.g., "WRU" that appears above "E" on the keytop in Figure 7-12). In the case of both shift and control, the shift key must be held down while the appropriate character Key is struck.
(2) The SHIFT key inverts the No. 5 code element. If the element is normally marking it makes it Spacing; if the element is normally spacing it makes it marking. It does this by two "two-headed" T-levers, one at the shift position and one at the No. 5 positton, each of which operates two contact wires, alternately opening one and closing the other. As shown in Figure 7-13, in the spacing condition the c. contact associated with the No. 5 T-lever is open and the d. contact is closed. In its unoperated position the a. contact associated with the SHIFT T-lever is closed and the b. contact is open. For example, if the "4" key alone is pressed, the code combination for "4! (--3-56-8, see Figure 7-2) is set up in the keyboard contacts and subsequently transmitted. In this case, the two-headed No. 5 T-lever holds the c. contact closed and the d. contact open, resulting in a marking No, 5 element (the signal path being through the stop segment, the common terminal, the closed c. contact, the closed a. contact, the No. 5 segment, the brushes, the inner disk and the start segment as shown in Figure 7-13).
(3) If the '4" key is depressed with the SHIFT key, the same condition is set up in the contacts except that the two-headed shift T-lever holds the a. contact open and the b. contact closed and thus. opens the signal circuit. This results in the No. 5 element being spacing rather than marking, and the code combination for "$" (--3--6-8) being transmitted.
(4) If the "N' keylever alone is depressed, the code combination for "N" (-234--78) is set by the code bar quently transmitted to the line. In this case the two-headed No. 5 T-lever holds the c. contact open and the d. contact closed. On the other hand, if the "N" key is depressed with the SHIFT key, the same condition is set up in the keyboard contacts as before except that the SHIFT key opens the a. contact and closes the b. contact and thus closes the signal circuit. This results in the No. 5 element being marking rather than spacing and the code combination for (-2345-78) being transmitted.
(5) The CTRL key converts the No. 7 element from marking to spacing. For example, if the "E" keylever alone is depressed, the "E" code combination (1-3---78) is set up in keyboard contacts and subsequently transmitted (the path of the current for the marking No. 7 element being through the stop segment, the common terminal, the closed control contact, the closed No. 7 contact, the No. 7 segment, the brushes, the inner disk, and the start segment). If the "E" key is held down with the CTRL key, the Same condition as before is set up in the contacts except that the control T-lever opens the control contact and thus breaks the signal circuit. This results in the No. 7 element being spacing and the code combination for "WRU" (1-3----8) being transmitted.

7-6. RECEPTION AND CONVERSION
(1) The selector mechanism receives the Signaling code combinations from the selector magnet driver and converts them to corresponding mechanical arrangements that control the code bar mechanism. The selector mechanism is described and illustrated in 'Description" (Section 1).
(2) A magnet coil is wired by two leads to the output of the driver. In the stop condition, the output of the driver is marking, and the coil is energized and holds the armature against a magnet When a code combination is received, the start pulse (spacing) de-energizes the coil and the armature moves rearward to its spacing position out of the way of a start lever (Figure 7-14). The latter moves up and carries an associated start cam follower into the indent in its cam. The follower, in turn, moves an attached trip lever up out of engagement with a clutch shoe lever. A Selector cam-clutch engages and makes one complete revolution (cycles) during which the start cam holds the Start lever out of the way of the armature.
(3) As the cam-clutch cycles, a spacing lock lever, a stripper bail, a code bar camclutch's trip follower arm, and selector levers (eight for Model 33, five for Model 32) ride on individual cams under spring pressure.
(4) Near the beginning of the cycle, the stripper cam pivots the stripper bail which strips any push levers selected during the previous cycle from their respective selector levers and leaves them in their unselected position in front of the selector levers. The design of the cam-clutch is such that, as each element of the code combination is received following the start element, an indent in the corresponding selector lever cam and the spacing lock lever cam are presented to their respective levers. Since the operation of each selector linkage is the same, only that of one of them will be described.
(5) If the intelligence element is spacing, it de-energizes the magnet coil, and the armature moves to its spacing (rear) position. The spacing lock lever is permitted to move up and it holds the armature in this position during the sampling interval (Figure 17-15). The selector lever is prevented from moving up into the indent of its cam by the armature, and the push lever remains in its unselected (spacing) position in front of the lever.
(6) On the other hand, if the element is marking, the armature moves frontward to its marking position out of the way of the selector lever and blocks the spacing lock lever. The selector lever moves up into the indent in its cam, locking the armature in its marking position during the sampling interval and permitting its spring-biased push lever to move rearward under the selector lever.
(7) As the code combination is received, each intelligence element is sampled in turn, and the corresponding selector levers and push levers are positioned accordingly (see Figure 7-4). The contours of the selector cams are such that, near the end of the cycle, they drive the selector levers and selected push levers downward and thus pivot corresponding blocking levers counterclockwise (as viewed from left) to their marking position in which their slotted portion is up (Figure 7-15). The blocking levers associated with the unselected push levers remain in the spacing position in which their slotted portion is down.
(8) Near the end of the cycle, the trip follower arm is moved rearward by its cam and trips the code bar clutch (see paragraph 7-6.¢.).
(9) When the stop element (marking) is received at the end of the code combination, the armature moves to its marking position above the start lever where it prevents the start cam follower from falling into the indent in its cam (Figure 7-14). In this position, the follower holds the trip lever down so that, when the cam-clutch completes its cycle, its shoe lever strikes the trip lever, and the clutch is disengaged,
(10) As an example, assume that the letter "D", whose code combination is 1--4-, is received by a Model 32 Printer (see Figure 7-4). The start pulse (spacing) trips the cam-clutch which begins its cycle. The stripper bail strips the selected push levers from the selector levers. The intelligence pulses are sampled in order, and the No. 1 and No. 4 push levers are selected. Near the end of the cycle, the cam-clutch cams the No. 1 and No. 4 push levers down and they pivot the No. 1 and No. 4 blocking levers to their marking position. The No. 2, No. 3 and No. 5 remain in their spacing position. The trip cam causes the trip follower arm to trip the code bar cam-clutch. The stop pulse (marking) disengages the selector cam-clutch, and the selector is returned to its stop position.

b, RANGE FINDER (See Figure 1-6).
(1) For optimum operation of the Printer, the selector must sample the code elements at the most favorable time. The range finder provides a means of determining this time by establishing a range of operating margins.
(2) When a range finder knob is loosened, a pointer may be moved along a range scale by a handle. This changes the angular position of the trip and latch levers with respect to the main shaft, and thus changes the position where the cam-clutch begins and ends its cycle. The effect of this operation is to change the time in the cycle when the selector samples each code pulse.
(3) Rotating the pointer counterclockwise from 60, the center of the scale, causes the selector to sample the trailing portion of the pulse. Rotating the pointer clockwise causes the selector to sample the leading edge. To establish the margins of the operating range, the pointer is moved first in one direction, then in the other, until errors in printing occur. The pointer is then set at the center of the range and the knob tightened.

c. CODE BAR MECHANISM (Figure 7-16).
(1) The code bar mechanism controls printing and the function mechanism. It is described in "Description" (Section 1).
(2) AS mentioned in paragraph 7-6,a.(8) above, near the end of the selector cycle, the selector cam-clutch pivots the code bar cam-clutch's trip follower arm. The arm through a trip shaft pivots a trip lever out of the way of the shoe lever, The cam-clutch engages and makes one revolution (cycles). See Figure 7-4.
(3) As the code bar cam-clutch cycles, a code bar reset lever follows its camming surface under the pressure of a code bar reset bail's spring. Early in the cycle, the cam through the reset lever permits the reset bail to pivot counterclockwise.
(4) There are ten bars in the Model 33 Printer and eight bars in the Model 32. As the reset bail pivots, the numbered bars (excluding the No. O bar in Model 32 Printers) are permitted under spring pressure to move uy and to the left and sense the position of the corresponding selector blocking levers. If a blocking lever is in its marking position (up), it permits its code bar to move all the way up and to the left to its marking position (see Figure 7-4). But if the blocking lever is in its spacing position (down), a projection on the lever holds the bar down in its spacing position. The operation of the print suppression code bar is described in paragraph 7-8.f.(2). The operation of the No. 0 bar on Model 32 Printers is described in paragraph 7-8.d.(3). The operation of the automatic carriage return-line feed bar is described in paragraph 7-12, Function levers under the code bars and carriage Slides that ride on top of the bars sense their positions and use them to control various operations as will be described in succeeding paragraphs.
(5) Early in the cycle, a trip cam pivots a follower arm which trips the function cam-clutch (see paragraph 7-7.b. and Figure 7-4).
(6) Near the end of the code bar cycle, the cam through the reset lever pivots the reset bail clockwise. The latter thus returns the bars to their stop (down and right) position.
(7) AS an example, take the reception of the letter "D" (1--4-) treated in paragraph 7-6.a.(10). above. The No. 1 and No. 4 blocking levers move to their marking position and the trip cam trips the code bar cam-clutch which begins its cycle. The reset bail permits the code bars to sense the position of the blocking levers. The No. 1 and No. 4 code bars are permitted by their blocking levers to move up and to the left to their marking position. The remaining bars are held down in their spacing position. The cam-clutch trips the function cam-clutch. Near the end of the cycle the reset bail returns the bars to their stop position.

7-7. FUNCTION MECHANISM (Figure 7-17).
a. The function mechanism enables the Printer to perform functions at the receipt of the proper code combinations. Functions are operations supplementary to printing the message, such as moving the carriage back to the left margin (carriage return) and moving the paper up (line feed ) so that a new line can be printed.
b. As mentioned in paragraph 7-4.c.(3), early in the code bar cycle, a cam pivots the function trip follower arm which moves the function trip lever out of engagement with its shoe lever. The function cam-clutch engages and makes one complete revolution (cycles). A function drive cam, through a follower arm and drive arm, causes the function rocker shaft to rock. The rocker shaft, in turn, through two drive linkages, moves a function drive bail up during the first part of the cycle and ay during the middle portion (see Figure 7-4).
c. The under side of the code bars are coded by a series of notches and projections. Under the code bars are a number of function levers which pivot on the same shaft as the function drive bail and are connected to the bail by springs. As the bail moves up, the Springs pull the levers up so that they sense the code bars. If a lever encounters one or more projections, it is retained in its down position against the tension of its spring. On the other hand, if the slots line up such that an opening is provided for a lever, it moves all the way up to its selected position.
d. In most cases, when a function lever moves up to a certain level, it is latched by an associated function pawl. Then when the drive bail pulls the lever and latched pawl down during the middle portion of the cycle, the pawl provides the motion to effect the function.
e. Near the beginning of the function cycle, a cam pivots a drive arm which moves the function stripper bail frontward (see Figure 7-4), Near the end of the cycle, the cam permits the drive arm under spring pressure to move the stripper bail rearward and strip any latched function pawls from their selected function levers.
f. The operation of the individual function levers and pawls are covered under the individual functions.

7-8, PRINTING.
a, GENERAL — A printing carriage prints the messages on the paper. The carriage is described and illustrated in "Description" (Section 1). Printing is controlled by the code elements described in paragraph 7-2. Although the Model 32 and 33 carriages are the same, the numbers of the code elements controlling the specific operations are different.

b. TYPEWHEEL (Figure 7-18).
(1) The characters used in printing are embossed on the cylindrical surface of atypewheel, A typewheel character arrangement is shown in Figure 7-18 in which the cylindrical surface is rolled out flat. The characters are arranged in 16 vertical rows of four characters each. For the sake of explanation, the wheel is divided into clockwise and counterclockwise fields to indicate in which direction the wheel is rotated to select the rows. The rows are then numbered 1 through 8 in each direction from the border-line between the fields. The characters in each row are designated the Ist through the 4th from top to bottom.
(2) Again for the sake of explanation, a printing area is indicated in the figure. This is the area the selected character must be in if it is to be printed when the print hammer strikes the typewheel. As shown in the figure, the border line between the fields is under the printing area when the Printer is in the stop condition. During the first part of each function cycle vertical and rotary positioning mechanisms impart separate, but simultaneous, motions to the wheel to select the proper character. The rotary mechanism rotates it either clockwise or counterclockwise to align the proper row with the printing area. The vertical mechanism raises it to place the proper character in the printing area, During the latter part of the function cycle the typewheel is returned to its stop position.
(3) For example, assume that the code combination representing the letter "D" is received by the Printer. The rotary mechanism rotates the wheel three and one half rows clockwise and the vertical mechanism raises it three characters plus the distance below the printing area. The print hammer drives it forward and imprints the letter "D' on the paper. The positioning mechanisms then return it to its stop position.

c. POWER — As the function cam-clutch cycles (paragraph 7-7.b.), an eccentric cam imparts oscillating motion through a carriage drive link to a carriage drive bail (see Figure 7-5). The bail pivots rearward during the first part of the cycle and frontward to its stop position during the latter part. (See Figure 7-4.) In doing so it causes a power bail on the carriage to pivot first clockwise (as viewed from left), then counterclockwise (see Figure 7-19). The power bail has two rollers that move along the drive bail and permit it to receive the motion regardless of the carriage's position along the printing line.

d. ROTARY POSITIONING.
(1) Direction of Rotation (Figure 7-19).
(a) Which way the typewheel rotates from the stop position is determined by the No. 3 code element on Model 32 Printers and the No. 4 element on Model 33. If this element is marking, the wheel is rotated counter-clockwise; if it is spacing, the wheel is rotated clockwise. In paragraphs (b) and (c) directly below, the numbers apply to the Model 32 are given.
(b) When a code combination is received in which the No. 3 element is marking, the No. 3 code bar moves up and to the left early in the code bar cycle. A following slide, through a linkage, moves a rotary drive arm down so that it engages aleft rotary rack, butnot a right one. If the No. 3 elementisspacing, the alternate condition exists in which the No. 3 code bar is down and the drive arm is up where it engages the right rack but not the left.
(c) A rotary drive bail is held against the power bail by a spring. As these bails rock clockwise (as viewed from left) during the first part of the function cycle, the drive arm, which is attached to the rotary positioning bail, moves toward the front. If the arm is down (No. 3 pulse marking), it pulls the left rack with it, and the rack rotates a rotary pinion, a cage, a spider, a shaft and the attached typewheel counterclockwise (as viewedfrom the top). On the other hand, if the arm is up (No. 3 pulse spacing), it pulls the right rack toward the front, androtates the typewheel clockwise. As the power bail and rotary drive bail rock back to their stop position during the latter part of the function cycle, two reset blocks on the drive bail return the racks and the typewheel to their stop position.
(2) Degree of Rotation (Figure 7-20).
(a) How far the typewheel rotates in either direction is determined by the No. 1 and No. 2 code elements and the No. 0 code bar on the Model 32 and the No. 1, 2 and 3 code elements on the Model 33. In paragraphs (b) through (e) directly below the numbers applying to the Model 32 are given.
(b) When the No, 1 andNo. 2 code pulses are both spacing, the corresponding code bars and their following rotary stop slides remain down. A common stop slide, which is moved by the other two, also remains down. As one of the racks is pulledfrontward, the opposite rack is driven rearward by the pinion and strikes the common stop (the one nearest the front). This permits the pinion to rotate the typewheel enough for the No. 1 or No. 2 vertical row (depending on the position of the No. 0 code bar as covered in paragraph 7-8. d. (3) below) of either the clockwise or counterclockwise fieldto be aligned with the printing area at the time of printing. When a rack is stopped, the rotary bailstops, and its spring extends as the power bail continues its travel.
(c) When the No. 1 element is marking and the No. 2 isspacing, the No. 1 code bar and slide move up, and the No. 1 slide lifts the commonslide. In this position, holes in the common slide permit whichever rack is moving toward the rear to pass through and strike the No. 2 slide ( second from the front) which is down. Thus the No. 3 or No. 4 row is aligned with the printing area.
(d) When the No. 2 code pulse is marking and the No. 1 is spacing, the No. 2 slide is moved up and lifts the common stop. The rack that's moving rearward passes through holes in these slides and strikes the No. 1 slide (third from the front) which is down. Thus, the No. 5 or No. 6 row is aligned with the printing area.
(e) When both the No, 1 and No. 2 code elements are marking, the No. 1 and No. 2 and common slides are moved up andpermit the rack to pass through their holes and strike the shift slide (farthest from front), Thus the No. 7 or No. 8 row is aligned with the printing area.
(3) Odd or Even Rows.
(a) Whether the odd or even rows are selected depends on the position of the No. 0 code bar on Model 32 Printers and the No. 1 code bar on Model 33. When this bar is up, the even rows are selected; when it is down the odd rows are selected. In Model 33 Printers, the No. 1 code element controls the position of this bar. In Model 32 Printers, it is controlled by a letters - figures shift mechanism which responds to the LETTERS and FIGURES code combinations.
(b) Model 33 (Figure 7-21).
1, The upper portion of the stop slides move up and down in slots in two guide plates. When one of the racks moves toward the rear and strikes one of the slides, the slides and guide plates are pushed toward the rear until the shift slide strikes rotary stop plate. During the latter part of the function cycle, the guides and slides are returned to their stop position by reset arms which are part of the printing mechanism (see paragraph 7-8.f.).
2, When the No. 1 code element is spacing, the No. 1 code bar and its following slide remain down, and the shift slide strikes front stop surfaces on the stop plate. This results in the No. 1, No. 3, No. 5or No, 7 vertical row being aligned with the printing area at the time of printing.
3, On the other hand, when the No. 1 code element is marking, the No. 1 code bar and the shift slide are up where the latter presents a narrower outline to the stop plate. Thus when the slide moves toward the rear, it fits into a cutout in the plate and strikes rear stop surfaces. The difference results in one more row rotation of the typewheel, and the No. 2, No. 4, No. 6, No. 8 row is aligned with the printing area.
Shift
1, When the Model 32 Printer is in the letters condition, the 0 code bar is blocked by a letters blocking lever whose extension engages one of bar's slots. When the code bar bail rocks to the left early in each code bar cycle, the 0 code bar is held in its down position. Thus the odd rows will be selected as covered in paragraph 7-8.d.(3)(b) above.
2. On receipt of the figures code combination, the code bars permit afigures function lever to rise to its up position where it is latched by its function pawl. Then as the lever and pawl are pulled down by the function bail during the middle portion of the function cycle, an extension on the pawl moves the letters blocking lever to its down position where it is latched by its pawl and no longer blocks the No. 0 code bar. The Printer is now in the figures condition, and the 0 code bar will move to its up position each code bar cycle until the letters code combination is received. This results in the selection of the even rows as covered in paragraph 7-8.d.(3)(b) above.
3. On receipt of the letters combination, the code bars permit a letters function lever to move to its up position where it is latched by its function pawl. As the lever and pawl are pulled down by the function bail during the middle portion of the cycle, the pawl contacts a slanting extension of the blocking lever's pawl and moves it rearward until it unlatches the blocking lever. The latter is then permitted to move up and block the 0 code. Thus the Printer is returned to the letters condition.

e. VERTICAL POSITIONING (Figure 17-23).
(1) The vertical positioning mechanism positions the typewheel so that the proper character in the selected row is in the printing area at the time of printing. It is controlled by the No. 4 and No. 5 code elements on the Model 32 Printer and by the No. 5 and No. 7 elements on the Model 33. In paragraphs (2) through (6) directly below, the numbers applying to the Model 32 are given.
(2) A vertical drive bail is held against the power bail by a spring. When these bails rock clockwise (as viewed from left) during the first part of the function cycle, the vertical drive bail, through a drive arm, lifts the spider, typewheel shaft, and typewheel. How far the typewheel is raisedis determined by three stop arms that are positioned in response to the No. 4 and No. 5 code elements. When the drive bail encounters an arm, it is stopped and its spring extends as the power bail continues to pivot. The spider moves up and down the bars of the cage and thus permits rotary motion to be transferred to the typewheel regardless of its vertical position. During the last half of the function cycle, the parts are returned to their stop position.
(3) When a code combination is received in which the No. 4 and No. 5 code elements are spacing, the No. 4 andNo. 5 codebars and their following vertical slides remain in their spacing (down) position, and no motion is transferred to the stoparms. As the rear extension of the drive bailrises, itstrikes the common stop arm which is the longest. This permits the typewheel to be raised to the point where the No. 1 character in the selected row is in the printing area at the time of printing.
(4) When the No. 4 element is spacing and the No. 5is marking, the No. 5 code bar moves its following slide up early in the code bar cycle. The slide pivots the common and No. 5 stop arm rearward out of the way of the drive bail. The bailthus strikes the No. 4 arm (the second longest), and the second character in the selected row is placed in the printing area.
(5) When the No, 4 element is marking and the No. 5 is spacing, the No. 4 slide pivots the No. 4 and common stop arm outof the way. The bail strikes the No. 5 stop arm (the shortest), and the third character is placed in the printing area,
(6) When both the No. 4 and No. 5 elements are marking, all three stop arms are pivoted out of the way. The bail moves up until it strikes a shoulder on the common stop arm, and the fourth character is placed in the printing area.

f. PRINTING MECHANISM.
(1) Printing (Figure 7-24).
(a) After the typewheel has been positioned during the first half of the function cycle, the printing mechanism supplies the impact which drives the selected character against the ribbon and paper. Provisions are included whereby printing is suppressed during functions.
(b) As the power bailrocks during the first part of the function cycle, it imparts through a link counterclockwise motion (as viewed from left) to a print bail. This bail through a link and pivot shaft pivots two reset arms. Midway in the cycle, the right arm moves a print trip lever out of engagement with a shoulder on the print hammer bail. A torsion spring snaps the hammer bail rearward, and the hammer drives the typewheel and ribbon against the paper. Thus the imprint of the selected character is transferred to the paper. The lower end of the typewheel's shaft pivots on the vertical drive arm (see Figure 7-23) and permits the wheel to be driven rearward. The hammer bail has a soft head which strikes the typewheel without damage.
(c) During the last half of the cycle, the power bail returns the printing parts to their stop position, and a print reset arm attached to the print bail returns the print hammer bail to its stop position where it is latched by the print trip lever.
(2) Printing Suppressed (Figure 7-25).
(a) Whenever a function code combination is received, printing is suppressed. As the other code bars rise early in the code bar cycle (paragraph 7-6.c.), a print-suppression code bar is held down by a print suppression latch (see Figure 7-4). Early in the function cycle, after any of the function levers has been selected, the latch is pivoted away from the code bar by a print-suppression cam on the function cam-clutch.
(b) If no function lever has been selected, the print-suppression code bar moves up and to the left to its selected position. A print-suppression slide follows the motion of this bar and pivots a print-suppression latch lever out of the way of the shoulder on the print hammer bail. Thus when the print trip lever releases the bail, its hammer is permitted to strike the typewheel, and printing occurs as covered in paragraph 7-8.£.(1).
(c) On the other hand, if any function lever moves up to its selected position, it engages one of a series of notches in the print-suppression code par. When the latch releases the code bar, the selected function lever prevents it from moving all the way to its selected position. Thus the print-suppression latch lever is not pivoted and catches the shoulder when the hammer bail is released by the trip lever. The hammer does not reach the typewheel and printing is suppressed.
(d) As the selected function lever moves down and withdraws from the notch in the print-suppression code bar, the latch, which has been returned to its stop position, engages a second latching surface on the bar. This prevents the bar from rising when the function lever is withdrawn, thus causing printing to occur before the print hammer is completely reset in its stop position. The print-suppression code bar is completely reset with the rest of the code bars at the end of the code bar cycle and at that time the latch engages the first latching surface (see Figure 7-4).

g. RIBBON MECHANISM (Figure 7-26).
(1) The ribbon mechanism supplies the ink for printing. As the Printer operates, the mechanism feeds the ribbon from one spool to the other, and reverses the direction of feed when the spool is nearly depleted. It is described and illustrated in "Description" (Section 1).
(2) As the power bail rocks during the first part of the function cycle, it pivots a ribbon power lever which moves a ribbon drive lever rearward, A feed pawl which rides on the drive lever acts on a ratchet to rotate a ribbon spool. A check pawl drops into the succeeding tooth and detents the ratchet until it is again rotated during the next operation.
(3) The mechanism continues to rotate one spool until the other is nearly depleted. An eyelet in the ribbon then engages a ribbon reversing arm. As the eyelet is pulled against the arm, the latter moves to a point where adetent spring shifts it to its alternate position where one of its reversing extensions falls ahead of an extension on the feed pawl. As the pawl moves frontward during the last half of the cycle, it strikes the arm's extension and is pivoted to its alternate position against the other ratchet. In doing this, it strikes an extension on the check pawl and pivots it to its alternate position against the other ratchet. The depleted spool is now rotated to take up the ribbon until the other spool is nearly depleted when reversal again takes place.
(4) The ribbon guide, which is spring biased upward, is mounted so that it will slide up and down on posts. As the print pivot shaft turns during the first half of the cycle (see paragraph 7-8.f.(1)(b) above), the two pivot arms permit the guide to rise so that it is between the selected character and the paper midway in the cycle. At this time the print hammer drives the typewheel and the ribbon against the paper. During the last half of the cycle the pivot arms retract the guide and ribbon to their stop position so that the printed characters are visible.
h. EXAMPLE
(1) Assume that the Model 32 Printer is in the letters condition and that the letter "D", whose code combination is 1--4-, is received. The No. 1 and No. 4 code bars move up and to the left to their marking position early in the code bar cycle. Since the No. 3 bar is down, the rotary drive arm moves up and engages the right rack. Since the No. 1 bar is up and the No. 2 is down, the No. 1 and common stop slides are moved up. Since the Printer is in the letters condition, the 0 code bar keeps the shift slide down. Since the No. 4 code bar is up and the No. 5 is down, the No. 4 and common stop arms are pivoted out of the way of the vertical drive bail.
(2) As the power bail rocks clockwise (as viewed from left) during the first part of the function cycle, the following occurs: The rotary drive arm pulls the right rack frontward and rotates the typewheel clockwise. The left rack, driven by the typewheel's pinion, moves rearward, passes through a hole in the common slide, and strikes the No. 2 stop slide. The stop slides and their guides are moved rearward, and the wider outline of the shift slide strikes the front stop surfaces of the stop plate. Thus, the No. 3 vertical row is aligned with printing area (see Figure 7-18).
(3) Concurrent with the rotary positioning, the vertical drive bail moves up until it strikes the No. 5 stoparm, and the thirdcharacter in the No. 3 row is placed in the printing area (see Figure 7-18).
(4) Since no function lever has been selected, the print-suppression code bar moves up and to the left early in the cycle and moves the print-suppression latch lever away from the print hammer bail. Midway in the cycle, the right reset arm moves the print trip lever out of engagement with the shoulder on the hammer bail, and the bail snaps rearward and drives the letter "D" and the ribbon against the paper.
(5) During the last half of the cycle the parts are returned to their stop position.

7-9. SPACING,
a. GENERAL — The spacing mechanism positions the carriage so that the printed characters are properly located horizontally on the paper. Each time a character is printed, the carriage is positioned one character to the right. Spacing is suppressed on all functions except space (SP) when spacing occurs and printing is suppressed. At the end of the printing line, spacing is suppressed and the Printer overprints. When the carriage return (CR) function is received, the carriage is returned to the left margin. The spacing mechanism is described and illustrated in "Description" (Section 1).
b. WITH PRINTING (Figure 7-27) — As the carriage drive bail moves rearward during the first half of the function cycle, a small roller mounted near its left pivot permits a toggle linkage, consisting of a spacing feed pawl and toggle link, to buckle under spring pressure. The pawl moves to the right and engages the next tooth on a ratchet whichis part of a spacing drum. When the roller is moved frontward during the last half of the function cycle, it unbuckles the toggle linkage, and the pawl is moved to the left and rotates the drum one tooth. This motion is imparted by a pulley at the top of the drum to a timing belt which is looped around a pulley on the right side of the Printer. The belt, in turn, moves the carriage to the right one space against the tension of a large carriage return spring. The carriage is held in this position by a check pawl which engages the drum's ratchet.
(a) On every function except space (SP), spacing as well as printing must be suppressed, When a character to be printed is received, the print-suppression code bar moves up and to the left as covered in paragraph 7-8.f.(2). In doing so, it pivots a space suppression latch so that it is moved to the right out of the way of the toggle linkage. This permits the linkage to buckle and effect spacing as described in paragraph 7-9.b. above.
(b) On the other hand, when a function is received, the print-suppression code bar remains down and to the right, as coveredin paragraph 7-8.f.(2), and thus does not pivot the space suppression latch, In this position, the latch engages the toggle linkage and prevents it from buckling all the way, and the feed pawl does not move far enough to the right to engage the next tooth. Thus, the drum is not rotated and the carriage is not spaced.
(2) At End of Line (Figure 7-27). — When the carriage reaches the right margin, a clamp on the spacing belt pivots an end-of-line lever counterclockwise. In this position, a latching surface on the spacing toggle link engages the lever and prevents the linkage from buckling and effecting spacing. Thus, spacing is suppressed, and the Printer overprints at the right margin until the CR code combination is received.
d. SPACE FUNCTION (Figure 7-28) — When the space (SP) code combination is received, the code bars permit a space function lever to move up to its selected position early in the function cycle. This motion is transferred through a space linkage to a space lever which moves the print-suppression latch out of the way of spacing toggle linkage. Thus, the spacing linkage is permitted to buckle completely and effect spacing as covered in paragraph 7-9.b. Printing is suppressed as covered in paragraph 7-8.f.(2).
e. CARRIAGE RETURN (CR) (Figure 7-29).
(1) When the CR code combination is received, the code bars permit the CR function lever to move up to its selected position during the first part of the function cycle. In this position, the lever is latched by its function pawl. As the function bail moves the lever and the pawl downward during the middle portion of the cycle, an extension on the pawl pivots a CR drive lever. This motion is transferred through a CR linkage to a CR lever which is moved frontward where it is latched by a carriage return latch.
(2) In moving frontward, the carriage return lever carries the spacing feed and check pawls out of engagement with the ratchet on the spacing drum. The carriage return spring then pulls the carriage back to the left margin. As the carriage nears the left margin, a lobe plate on the carriage strikes a latch lever which causes the latch to release the CR lever. The latter moves rearward under spring pressure and permits the feed and check pawls to again engage the spacing ratchet. Late in the function cycle, the CR function pawl is stripped from its function lever by the stripper bail.
(3) As the carriage approaches the left margin at relatively high speed, a piston on the carriage enters a dash pot cylinder andcompresses the air ahead of it. The air forms a cushion which slows the carriage and then, as it escapes through a small, variable hole at the left end of the cylinder, permits the carriage to be stopped at the left margin without excessive shock.

7-10. PAPER FEEDING (Figure 7-30).
a. The paper feed mechanism positions the paper vertically so that the printed characters are properly located in lines on the paper. It feeds the paper on receipt of the line feed (LF) code combination. It may be adjusted for either single or double line feed.
b. The paper feeds off a roll and is led around a platen that positions it vertically in front of the typewheel. A paper guide plate leads it down around the platen. A pressure roller, which sits in a cut-out in the guide, holds the paper against the platen so that it is fed when the platen rotates, A curved wire shaft biases the pressure roller and the guide plate against the paper. The pressure is released by a lever on the right end of the shaft. The paper is held around the front of the platen by a wire guide and is led up out of the Printer by a deflector guide. It can be manually fed by a knob on the left end of the platen.
c. When the LF code combination is received, the code bars permit the LF function lever to move up to its selected position early in the function cycle. The function lever, inturn, moves up a LF blocking lever which is engaged by the latching surface of a LF drive link. As the left drive arm on the function rocker shaft moves down during the middle portion of the cycle, a LF arm engages the blocking lever and moves it down. This motion is transferred through a LF linkage to a pawl which engages a ratchet on the left end of the platen. The pawl rotates the platen and thus feeds the paper up one or two lines of printing depending on what the mechanism is adjusted for.
d. The pawl is guided into the teeth by two guide posts. A check pawl riding on a ratchet at the rightend of the platen holds the paper in position until the platen is again rotated. At the end of the cycle, the function stripper bail contacts a stripper plate and strips the drive link from the blocking lever which is returned to its unoperated position.

7-11, END OF LINE BELL.
As the carriage moves to the right during printing, a projection picks up an automatic carriage return-line feed (Auto CR-LF) code bar at a predetermined point. The carriage moves the bar to the right a short distance farther at which time a notch in the bar permits a bell function lever to move up to its selected position where it is latched by its function pawl, During the middle portion of the function cycle, the lever moves the pawl down against the pressure of the latter's spring. When the stripper bail strips the pawl late in the function cycle, the pawl moves up and causes a clapper mounted on a wire spring to snap up and ring a gong.
a. As described in the preceding paragraph, the carriage picks up the Auto CR-LF code bar at a predetermined point and moves it to margin, a notch in the code bar permits an Auto CR-LF function lever to move up to its selected position where it is latched by its pawl.
b. The Auto CR-LF function lever, in turn, moves the LF blocking lever up to where it is latched by the LF link. Line feed then occurs as described in paragraph 7-10.
c. When the Auto CR-LF lever and its pawl are pulled down during the middle portion of the cycle, the pawl encounters an extension on the CR pawl and moves it down. CR then occurs as described in paragraph 7-9.e.

a. GENERAL.
(1) An answer-back mechanism automatically transmits a predetermined sequence of characters for identification purposes. The basic mechanism may be actuated in two ways: (1) remotely by the reception of a predetermined call character, and (2) locally by the depression of the HERE IS key. In addition, as an optional feature, it may be actuated by a trip-magnet mechanism at the receipt of a signal generated by external equipment such as a Data Set. The mechanism is described and illustrated in "Description" (Section 1).
(2) A drum is coded with the characters making up the answer-back sequence. Sequences of up to 20 characters may be encoded, When the mechanism is actuated, it rotates the drum which sets up the code combinations in a set of answer-back contacts. The distributor converts the positions of the contacts to start-stop signals for transmission. After the answer-back sequence has been sent, the mechanism returns itself to its unoperated condition. For operational considerations that will be described below, provisions are made for suppressing the first character sensed by the contacts, and for preventing the mechanism from being actuated by the local generation of the call character.
b. DRUM (Figure 7-28) — Viewing it from the rear, the drum has 11 "levels" as follows from right to left: five numbered levels, feed ratchet, control cam, suppression, and three more numbered levels, The numbering for Model 32 and Model 33 are illustrated in Figure 7-28, Viewing it from the numbered end, it has 21 rows, 1 through 20 and start (ST). The ratchet is used to rotate the drum as described in paragraph 7-13.c. The control cam, which has four removable tines, controls the length of answer-back as described in paragraph 7-13.¢. The suppression level is used to suppress the first character and delete errors as described in paragraph 7-13.f, By breaking off tines in the various rows at the numbered intelligence levels, the drum may be coded to generate the proper answer-back characters. For example, if the first character is the letter "D" (1--4-), tines at the No. 1 and 4 levels should be broken off in the No. 3 row (the first two rows are usually used for CR and LF). The fourth row would be coded to represent the second character and so on. Instructions for coding the drum appear in Installation" (Section 2).
c. REMOTE ACTUATION MECHANISM.
FUNCTION
(1) The function mechanism must be arranged to actuate the mechanism at the receipt of the proper call character.
(2) When the answer-back call character is received by the Printer, the code bars permit the answer-back function lever to move up to its selected position where it is latched by its pawl. As the function lever and pawl are moved down by the function drive bail during the middle portion of the function cycle, the pawl pivots an answer-back bail which moves a trip link frontward., The trip link pivots a control lever out of an indentation in the control cam. The control lever, through the trip bail, moves the trip lever rearward out of engagement with the shoe lever and trips the distributor cam-clutch.
(3) When the distributor cam-clutch begins its cycle, a cam roller moves up and permits a feed lever to pivot rearward against the control lever. A feed pawl pivoted on the feed lever is moved rearward where it picks up the next tooth on the drum's ratchet. Near the end of the function cycle, the answer -back function pawl is stripped from its function lever by the stripper blade. The control lever under spring pressure tends to return to its unoperated position in the indentation in the control cam. This would terminate the answer -back operation by disengaging the distributor cam-clutch. However, since the feed pawl is now engaged with the next ratchet tooth, the spring pressure on the control lever is not strong enough to overcome the combined pressure of the feed lever spring and the drum's detent, and the mechanism remains in its operated condition through the first distributor cycle.
(4) Near the end of the distributor cycle, the cam roller on the distributor cam-clutch moves the feed lever and feed pawl frontward, and the pawl acts on the ratchet to rotate the drum one tooth. The control cam on the drum now prevents the control lever and trip lever from returning to their stop position. The cam-clutch thus continues to cycle and rotate the answer-back drum.
(5) The answer-back contacts are wired in parallel with the keyboard contacts to the segments of the distributor disks. As the drum is rotated during the answer-back operation, the contact wires under spring pressure sense each row of tines in turn. If a tine has been broken off at a given level in a row, the associated wire moves frontward to its marking position against a common terminal. On the other hand, if a tine is present, it holds the spring away from the terminal in its spacing position. As the distributor cam-clutch cycles, the distributor converts the position of the contacts to sequential start-stop signals for transmission in same manner as it does with the keyboard contacts (see paragraph 7-5,c.).
(6) The drum continues to rotate until the next indentation in the control cam is presented to the control lever. The latter then moves into the indentation and returns the associated parts to their unoperated position. The shoe lever then strikes the trip lever and disengages the cam-clutch. The mechanism is thus returned to its unoperated condition.
d. LOCAL ACTUATION-HERE IS KEY — When the HERE IS key is manually depressed, it pivots a bell crank which moves the trip link frontward. The trip link pivots the controllever to its operated position, and the answer-back operation is the same as that described in paragraph 7-13.c. above.
e. FIRST CHARACTER SUPPRESSION,
(1) Since they are wired in parallel with the keyboard contacts, the answer-back contacts must all be in their spacing position when the mechanism is unoperated so that they do not interfere with keyboard transmission. Therefore, inasmuch as the mechanism does not feed the drum until near the end of the first cycle, the first character sensed must be all spacing. However, such a character is undesirable in some systems. Therefore, a feature is provided for shunting the signal line during the sensing of the first character.
(2) As described in paragraph 7-13.c.(2) above, the trip link moves frontward when answer-back is initiated and remains there until it is terminated. In this position, it permits a suppression contact wire to sense the drum's suppression level. The suppression contact is wired so that it shunts the outgoing signal line when it is closed. The tine at the suppression level of the first character must always be broken off. Thus, the suppression contact wire is selected and keeps the line marking until the second character is sensed. The tines are left at the suppression level in all the other rows, and thus hold the wire unselected throughout the rest of the answer-back operation. At the end of the operation, the trip link again moves rearward and holds the wire unselected while the mechanism is unoperated.
f. ANSWER-BACK SUPPRESSION ON TRANSMISSION.
(1) Since the Printer receives every code combination that it transmits, the sending of the call character would actuate the local answer-back mechanism as well as the one at the distant station. To prevent this, a blocking mechanism is provided which prevents the function mechanism from operating in the answer-back area during transmission.
(2) As the distributor cam-clutch cycles, a blocking cam pivots a blocking follower lever which pulls a blocking link rearward. The link pivots a blocking pawl rearward until it releases a blocking latch lever which, under spring pressure, moves up against the function drive bail. When the function drive bail and the latch lever move up during the first part of the function cycle, the latch lever cams the blocking pawl further rearward where anextension on the pawl is over an extension on the answer-back function lever. The function lever is thus prevented from moving up far enough to be latched by its pawl and initiate answer-back.
(3) During the latter part of the distributor cycle, the blocking arm allows the blocking link to move frontward to its unoperated position. As the function drive bail moves down during the middle portion of the function cycle, it drives the blocking latch lever downward to the point where the blocking pawl is permitted to pivot frontward to its unoperated position. Thus every time a character is initiated locally, the cam-clutch cycles and operates the blocking mechanism which prevents the answer-back function lever from sensing the code bars and initiating answer-back regardless of what character is processed by the Printer assembly. On the other hand, when remotely initiated characters are received, the distributor cam-clutch does not cycle, the blocking mechanism is not operated, and the function lever is permitted to sense the code bars and initiate answer-back on the call control character.
g, LENGTH OF ANSWER-BACK.
(1) The length of the answer-back sequence can be varied either by the control cam or the suppression contact. Using the control cam, the mechanism can be coded for either one-, two-or three-cycle operation. The control cam has removable tines at four positions, For one cycle operation, one of these tines is broken off so that the drum stops at the start character. This arrangement yields 21 characters, 20 of which may be used in the answer-back sequence since the start character must be suppressed.
(2) For two-cycle operation, two of the control cam's tines are broken off so that the drum stops at the start and 11th row respectively. This arrangement yields 10 and 11 characters alternately, 9and 10 respectively, which may be used in the answer-back sequence. For three-cycle operation, three of the control cam's tines are broken off so that the drum stops at the start, 14th and 17th row. This arrangement yields seven characters per cycle, six of which may be used for the answer -back sequence. When multiple-cycle operation is employed, the answer-back sequence must be coded in each segment of the drum so that it will be transmitted every time answer-back is initiated.
(3) When the suppression contact is used to control the length of the sequence, the drum is stepped through one complete revolution each time answer-back is initiated, regardless of the length of the sequence. Unneeded rows are eliminated from the sequence by breaking out their suppression level, For example, if 12 character sequence is required, the suppression level of rows 13 through 20 would be broken off. When the drum presents these rows to the contacts, the characters will be shunted out. The suppression level can be broken off to delete a character when an error has been made in coding.

7-14, CALL CONTROL ASSEMBLY — DIAL TWX (4409 WD).
a. GENERAL.
(1) The call control assembly covered in this paragraph couples the Model 32 Printer through a Data Set to telephone networks for use in Bell System Dial TWX Service.
In conjunction with the Data Set, it pro- trolling and completing calls. It is described and illustrated in "Description" (Section 1). Paragraph 7-14.b. outlines in general terms its overall operation. Paragraph 7-14.c. covers the signal requirements for its operation with the Data Set. Paragraph 7-14.d. through 7-14.f. explains its step-by-step operation. 4407WD, 4408WD, and 4409WD are applicable schematic wiring diagrams,
(2) The call control assembly, when used with the i0i1A Data Set, is connected with conventional telephone central offices having the required routing and message accounting equipment. These are generally the same offices and equipment serving telephone customers in the area. Direct current signals are used for both originating and terminating traffic, providing the same conditions as for conventional local telephone set operation. The dial on the set is a d.c. pulsing device that initiates connections. Also included in the Set are ringing or tone sounding apparatus for alerting the called party. Optionally available is an automatic answer back mechanism.

b. GENERAL OPERATION.
(1) The call control assembly provides for signaling speeds up to 100 wpm from d.c. marking and spacing intelligence pulses originating from the distributor in the associated Printer. These pulses are directed to the input of the selector magnet drive in the call control assembly where they are amplified and returned to the Printer as 0.500 ampere d.c. pulses to operate the selector magnet.
(2) If the originate (ORIG) key on the call control assembly has been depressed and connection with a called station satisfactorily completed, the intelligence pulses originated by the distributor are also connected with the Data Set. The Data Set converts the d.c. pulses to tone signals for transmission over telephone lines. Another Data Set, located at the called station, converts the tone signals back to d.c. pulses, which are directed to the input of the selector magnet driver, there to operate the selector on the Printer of the called station. The Printer at a given station normally copies both the transmitted and received d.c. signals, operating on a half duplex basis.
(3) Although the Data Set is not a part of this equipment, a brief discussion of its function is necessary to understand the operation of the system. Start-stop d.c. signal pulses form essentially a square wave which cannot readily be transmitted over telephone lines, The 101A Data Set is basically a converter which changes the d.c. signals from the sending or calling station into frequency-shifted tones for transmission over the telephone network, A marking pulse from a sending station is converted to a 1270 cycle marking signal (F,mark) and a spacing pulse becomes a 1070 cycle spacing signal (F space). The Data Set at the receiving or called station sends a 2225 cycle marking signal (F mark) and a2025 cycle spacing signal (Fo space). During transmission of a message the calling station sends mark and space tones (F, mark and space) while the called station sends'a continuous mark tone (F, mark). In this way the telephone facilities are operated on a full duplex basis. If the signal received at either station (F, mark and space at the called station and F. mark at the calling station) shifts to a space tone for more than one second, or if the received signal is lost for one second, the Data Set will cause the station to be disconnected, This provides assurance that the connection is maintained for the entire period of message transmission.
(4) The call control assembly, used with the Data Set, operates with conventional telephone central offices that have the necessary routing and accounting facilities. In operation, a call is initiated by depressing the ORIG key. A lamp illuminates the pushbutton and the dial tone will be heard through a loud speaker. If the line is busy, a busy-signal will be heard and the CLEAR key should be depressed. If the line is open, the operator dials the number of the desired station. This causes the called station to go into connect condition. If the Set is manually operated, the called station operator presses the answer (ANS) button. Following a short interval, about 1-1/4 seconds, in which telephone facilities are connected, the called station transmits a mark tone (F,) and receives a mark tone (F,) from the calling station. Receiving the continuous F, mark tone from the called station for one second causes the calling station to go into traffic condition, and its motor is turned on. Likewise, the continuous F, mark tone from the calling station for one second causes the called station to go into traffic condition, and its motor is turned on. Either station can now transmit, manually or automatically.
(5) At the end of the message, either station may originate a disconnect by depressing the CLEAR pushbutton, at which time each station goes back to its idle condition, ready to receive or originate other calls. For keyboard practice, maintenance purposes, or preparation of copy, the LOCAL pushbutton is depressed. This turns on the motor and disables automatic answering facilities if present. In event of an incoming call during local operation, the set responds to ringing signals and the ANS pushbutton must be operated manually. Operation of the TEST pushbutton causes received signals to be re-transmitted to the distant station for maintenance purposes. A lamp, associated with each key, illuminates the pushbutton whenever that button has been operated and the operating condition exists. The ANS lamp is pulsed in response to ringing signals of an incoming call, and lights continuously when the call is answered. The CLEAR lamp is automatically extinguished 1.5 seconds after the button has been depressed and disconnect is completed.
(6) A steady mark signal blinds the associated Printer during all intervals, except when in the traffic condition. This prevents spurious characters from being printed except due to loss of signals, circuit noise, or generate break or "space-disconnect" signals.
(7) Power Requirements — Power input to the Printer is 115 v. +10%, 60 cps +2%. Average power consumption is 35 watts (not including Printer's motor) with peaks up to 50 watts permitted.

c. SIGNALING LEVELS.
(1) As measured at the telephone loop terminals, transmission should not exceed 0 dbm at any time. Signal level loss over the subscriber's loop, between the call control assembly with its associated Data Set and the serving central office, should not exceed 14 dbm over a range of 1,000 to 2,300 cycles (see requirements of F, and F, signals in paragraph 7-14.b.(3) above). Transmission of F, and F, signals is adjustable in the Data Set. The transmitted frequencies or tones generated are held to within +5 cycles of the nominal for any combination of electrical and environmental conditions within the normal operating range of the set.
(2) Normal signaling margins should be maintained at signal levels down to -45 dbm, with decreasing margins to -50dbm. At -53 dbm, with noise level at least 3 dbm lower, the unit will go into "space hold" condition, and at all lower levels, or when no signals are being received, spacing output is provided. Maximum signal distortion, or loss of margin, as a result of tone modulation or demodulation in the Data Set, should not exceed 5% to 8% (loss of 5 to 8 points of range by the recording Printer). When two stations send their respective F, and Fy tones simultaneously at an output level of 0dbm, the tone as received at each station should be -45 dbm.

d. PROGRESS OF A CALL.
(1) To initiate a call the ORIG pushbutton is depressed and the call control assembly leaves the idle condition at the calling station. During the period of time in which connection is being made, the telephone central office makes no time measurements, When the ORIG pushbutton is closed, the call control assembly is conected to the telephone line through the Data Set, and "off-hook" is set up. The amplifier is connected into the circuit so that the dial tone from the central office is heard. The called station is dialed while the amplifier monitors the progress,
(2) At the called station audible and visible signaling devices are operated. The called station goes "off-hook" and into the connect condition upon operation of the ANS pushbutton circuit, by manual or automatic means, at the distant Al this time, there is a non-signaling 1.225 seconds during which accounting and toll recording facilities at the telephone exchange will be cleared. Following the non-signaling interval, the called station transmits its Fy mark tone and sets its monitoring timer to respond to the F, mark tone from the calling station, When the continuous F, mark tone is received at the calling station tor a period of one second, indicating that a Dial TWX station has answered, it will go into the "traffic" condition and turn on its motor. When the continuous Fy mark tone is received at the called station for an interval of one second, it will indicate that a Dial TWX station originated the received call and this Set also will go into the "traffic" condition. The station may now acknowledge the call either by operator keyboarding, or by automatic answer-back message transmission (optional equipment). The monitoring timers at both stations are set to respond to reception of a space tone from the distant station. Traffic can now be exchanged from either station on a half-duplex basis.
(3) During the time the two stations are connected (traffic interval), either station can initiate a disconnect. Operation of the CLEAR pushbutton at either station will cause transmission of a spacing signal of 1.5 seconds duration, after which the station originating the disconnect will discontinue its tone transmission and go back "on-hook" (idle). The other station, after receiving the spacing signalfor one second, will automatically transmit its 1.5 second spacing signal and then go into idle or "on-hook" condition. Both stations will then be back in their original idle condition in which calls can be either originated or accepted.
(4) Call control assemblies equipped with automatic answering facilities will respond to received ringing signals, turning the Set on at the end of the ringing interval and proceeding through the connect to the traffic condition. Automatic message answer-back is a part of this feature. The presence of an operator is required in order to complete disconnect and return the set to idle condition. For unattended service, an automatic disconnect timing device (optional) actuated when a call is answered, will cause the Set to go through the traffic condition, send the 1.5 second spacing tone, and go back "on-hook" if the Fy, mark tone is not received within eight seconds after the called station answered, This is designed to prevent the unattended station from being "busied" by (telephone) calls that fail to cause a full traffic connection to be set up. This feature does not affect normal autumatic disconnect upon receiving the one second spacing tane or loss of tones due to a "drop off." as telephone to Errors iff dialing, as well plant troubies that cause improper connections to data-phone service, are evidenced by audible signals at the calling Station. Such conditions are manually cancelled by the operator at either means of the CTFAR pushbutton.
This returns both stations to the 'on-hook" idle condition. (Since no mark tones were received, the Printer may run "open" briefly until the Sets go through the traffic condition on their way to idle.) When there is a loss of signals due to "drop-off," disconnect will automatically occur by means of "space hold" facilities (see paragraph 7-14. c. (2) above). Break signals generated from a printer keyboard are limited to 0.450 second, followed automatically by a mark condition, even when the break key continues to be depressed. In this way, two successive blank signals can be received by the receiving selector, without causing an automatic disconnect (see paragraph (4) above).
(6) When the LOCAL pushbutton is depressed, automatic answering facilities are disabled and the motor is energized so that the Printer can be used for preparing copy without transmitting to another station. In this condition the Set can also be used for operator practice or for maintenance purposes. If an incoming signal is received during this time, it is manifested by ringing signals, and manual operation of the ANS pushbutton is required in order to receive the message. Means are also provided by operating the TEST pushbutton, for connecting the d.c. output of the Data Set demodulator back to the modulator, so that received signals can be re-transmitted to the sending, or distant, station (central office test position) for maintenance purposes. The monitoring timer is disabled during this time so that sustained intervals of mark or space signals may be repeated through the Set. In the TEST connection, the operator can reverse Fy; and F9 tones upon request from test position.

e. SELECTOR MAGNET DRIVER (Figure 7-32),
(1) The selector magnet driver consists of a printed circuit card, a power transformer, a filter capacitor, and an external power resistor. The components of the driver set are mounted on the printed circuit card, except for the larger components, and the card inserted into a 15-point edge connector for interconnection with other components. The power transformer and filter capacitor, mounted to the rear of the circuit card, are part of the integral d.c. source of the call control assembly. Use of a transformer permits isolation of the entire selector circuit from other grounds. The selector magnet driver operates on 0.020 or 0.060 ampere neutral signals or 0.030 ampere polar signals, depending upon the system. The Dial TWX System generally employs 0.020 ampere neutral operation. If it should become necessary to change the mode of operation, the card should be removed from the connector before attempting to change the strapping. Input signals of 0.060 ampere are connected to terminals 12 and 1, leaving resistors R1 and R2 in parallel with each other. For input signals of 0.020 ampere, strap "W" is removed and the input is connected at terminal 12. If it is necessary to match the impedance of a 0.060 ampere magnet driver, strap "W" is cut and the input connected at terminal 10. For polar operation, R1 and R2 are omitted from the circuit and connected to the input at terminals 12 and 1. The output of the selector magnet driver is 0.500 amperes provided on marking signals for operation of the selector magnet on the Printer.
(2) The transistor bias voltages and low voltage references that set the input switching level of the selector magnet driver are developed by the four varistors or "click reducers" identified as CR1, CR2, CR3, and CR4 in the schematic, Figure 7-32. These varistors are two diffused junction silicon diodes mounted in opposite directions. The device has a forward diode characteristic in either direction so that its voltage drop will vary slightly with current. At 100 milliamperes, there is a voltage drop of about 0.8 volt across each.
(3) The schematic in Figure 7-32 is a switching circuit, made up of transistors Q1 and Q2. These transistors form a "snap action" trigger circuit that changes from one state to the other at a mid-point value of the input current, and is instantaneous regardless of slope, on time rate of change of input current. When the input signal is marking, Q1 is non-conductive and Q2 is conductive, and, conversely, when the input signal is spacing, Q1 is conductive and Q2 is non-conductive. For neutral operation, no line current flows during the spacing condition, Thus, the drop across the CR1, CR2, CR3, and CR4 decreases and Q1 is turned on at the half line current point by a negative current through R4 and R3. The collector of Ql rises toward 0, applying the reverse current to Q2, turning Q2 off and de-energizing the selector magnet. At this time the magnet opposes the change in current and applies a transient to the collector of Q2 which is more negative than the battery potential at terminal5. CR6 now conducts, passing the transient through Cl and R7 which limits the transient to a value well under the breakdown voltage of Q2, while the magnet energy is being dissipated. For marking input, positive current is applied to terminal 12 or 10 producing a total voltage drop of about 3 volts across CRI, 2, 3, and 4. R3 connects half of this voltage to the base of Q1, turning Q1 off as the current reaches 1/2 of itsfinal value. The collector of Q1 goes negative, and a drop across R6 is applied to the base of Q2, turning Q2 on. RS provides emitter bias to Q1, and supplies a regenerative action to the transition.
(4) Input Protection — Resistor R1 and R2 samples the current flowing into the base of Q1. If the current exceeds a predetermined safe value of around 100 milliamperes, the voltage developed across RI and the base to emitter junction of Ql exceeds the forward drop of CR1 and CR2, and the majority of any excess current is shunted through them and around Q1. This protects the transistor from high current surges. Since the varistors are bi-directional, the input is protected for excess currents of either polarity.
(5) Output Circuit — Transistor Q2 controls the current fully through the selector magnet coil, The selector magnet, in series with an external 35 ohm 25 watt resistor is connected between the collector of Q2 at terminal 13 and negative battery at terminal 5, and supplies the load for Q2. On marks the current through Q2 quickly rises to 0.500 amperes, energizing the selector magnet. The supply current for marking and spacing conditions can be adjusted for customer requirements by varying the tap on the external 35 ohm resistor. However, this is not normally required.

f. SPEAKER AMPLIFIER (Figure 7-33).
(1) The function of the speaker amplifier is to provide an amplified audio signal in the 300 to 3,000 cycle range. Its input signal consists of dial tones or busy signals of approximately -90 dbm received from the telephone line by way of the Data Set. The input impedance of the amplifier is about 1800 ohms, and the output impedance 125 ohms with a signal amplification of 60 dbm. It operates from a -20 v. +10% applied to terminal 15, and its output, connected to terminals 3 and 5, drives the speaker.
(2) The circuit (Figure 7-33) is that of a two stage transistorized resistance-capacitance coupled audio amplifier. Positively biased input signals are connected at terminal 13 and return to ground at terminal 9 through potentiometer R1 and resistor R2. The setting of R1 determines the signal level applied to the base of Ql through the coupling capacitor C1 and is, therefore, the volume control for the set. Q1 amplifies the base input signals approximately 30 db. The output of transistor Q1 is coupled to the base of transistor Q2, through capacitance C3, where the signal is again amplified about 30 db. The output of Q2 is coupled to the speaker through the impedance matching transformer T.
(3) The other components of the amplifier and their function in the circuit are as follows: C2 and C4 are emitter by-pass capacitors for Ql and Q2 respectively, paralleling the emitter limiting resistors RS and R10; Cd acts as a high frequency filter across the primary of impedance matching transformer T; C6 and C7 are used as decoupling filters in the power supply; R23, R4, R8 and R9 are base biasing resistors for Q1 and Q2; R6 is the collector load resistor for QI and the primary of T is the collector load for Q2; R11 is the voltage dropping resistor in the -20 v. supply line.

7-15. CALL CONTROL ASSEMBLY — TELEX (4779WD).
a. GENERAL.
(1) The call control assembly covered in this paragraph couples the Printer to telegraph networks for use in the Western Union TELEX Service and provides facilities for initiating, accepting, controlling and completing calls. It is described in "Description" (Section 1). Paragraph 7-15.b. outlines in generaltermsits overalloperation., Paragraphs 7-15.c. through 7-15.f. explain its detailed operation. Applicable schematic wiring diagram is 4779WD.
(2) The assembly operates over short and intermediate lengthtelegraph loops using neutral signaling, or over longer loops with polar signaling when modified with proper polar-to-neutral converting circuitry. It includes a power supply, local-remote control circuits, a selector magnet driver circuit, and a motor delay timer circuit,
b. GENERAL OPERATION.
(1) A selector magnet driver circuit delivers marking signals of 0.500 ampere and spacing signals of essentially 0 ampere to the associated Printer selector magnet. The signals trigger the driver circuit at about half the current level for normal (0.060 ampere mark) neutral input signals. In Sets modified for polar operation the signal is applied to polar-to-neutral converting circuits and then to the driver,
(2) The operator's controls, used for originating calls, consists of a set of pushbutton keys and a telephone type dial:
(a) There are four translucent, nonlocking keys. An illuminating lamp associated with each key is energized under the operating conditions described in the following paragraphs, except that the START lamp is a spare and does not light.
(b) The dial, a conventional telephone type, operates normally closed bifurcated pulsing contacts that open and close to send dialing pulses during the dial run-down interval. The pulses the contacts open for 0.061 +0.003 second during each pulse interval. A pair of normally open "off-normal" contacts close when the dial wheel is rotated from its idle position. These contacts provide a steady mark current to "blind" the printer selector when dialing is undertaken. This prevents the printing of spurious characters if dialing is necessary when in the connected condition as in multi-address calling.
(3) Neutral Signaling Conditions.
(a) In the idle condition, with the motor and Printer stopped and visual indicators deenergized, there is a positive current of 0.005 ampere in the telegraph loop. When the calling station operator depresses the START pushbutton, it causes the shunting of a major portion of the loop resistance and the loop current increases to 0.060 ampere. The start button must be held in the depressed position while switching apparatus in the telegraph exchange is made available. When the circuit is ready, the telegraph exchange interrupts the 0.060 ampere loop current for about 0.025 seconds. This "Proceed to Dial" signal causes the DIAL lampto be illuminated at the calling station, and locks in the shunt to the loop resistance so that the operator may now release the start pushbutton and proceed to dial the number of the called station. Rotation of the dial transmits signals consisting of no current for 0.060 second followed by full (0.060 ampere) for 0.040 second during each dial pulse interval. When dialing is completed, the exchange furnishes the connection and signifies this by reversing the telegraph loop current from positive to negative, which causes the printer motor to start and the CONN lamp to light. Message transmission can now be exchanged between the connected Printers. The line signals are 0.060 ampere marking and zero current spacing.
(b) If the distant called station is busy or disabled at the time of a call, the local telegraph exchange reverses the local loop current from positive to negative for about 0.200 second, then causes it to revert to positive current again. This causes the local motor to start and the CONN lamp to light momentarily, but then both turn off and the Set returns to the idle condition as the positive current is detected.
(c) Incoming Calls — The local telegraph exchange responds to an incoming call by reversing the idle signal loop from positive to negative current. At the local station, the CONN lamp is illuminated and the Printer motor is turned on as the shunt to the loop resistance is applied in response to the current change. Message transmission can now take place with unattended service at the receiving station.
(d) Disconnect — Following completion of traffic, a disconnect can be originated from either the calling or the called station. Holding the STOP pushbutton depressed causes the line to go open (zero current). In approximately three seconds, the local exchange causes the connection to the distant station to be broken, and reverses the current in the local loop so that positive current flows, limited by the local station loop resistance, This turns off the motor and extinguishes the CONN lamp. The STOP pushbutton is released after the CONN lamp goes out. The original idle condition is now restored. When a disconnect is initiated from a remote station, the local exchange recognizes the open line interval and breaks the connection. The loop current is reversed back to positive and the local station returned to the idle condition as stated above.
(e) Local operation is provided by depressing the LOCAL pushbutton until the LOCAL lamp is turned on. This places the Printer Set in an "off-line" operating condition, for preof copy, practice or maintenance purposes. To return to the idle condition, the regular disconnecting key (STOP) is held operated until the lamp is extinguished, or a call can be initiated by operating the START pushbutton directly. If a call is received while the Set is in the LOCAL condition, the buzzer will sound for an interval of 2.6 seconds and the set will automatically shift over to the call-connected condition with the CONN lamp illuminated.
(4) Polar Signaling Condition.
(a) Call control assemblies that are modified for polar operation respond to and transmit polar telegraph signals on separate receiving and sending "legs" extending to the telegraph exchange facilities. The operating conditions and sequence are similar to that for neutral signaling (paragraph (3) above.).
(b) In the idle condition, the sending and receiving legs each have from 0.015 to 0.040 ampere positive current flowing. The sending leg current is supplied by the call control assembly and the receiving leg current by the central exchange. At the local station, the polar adapter interconnects the legs with the neutral signaling control and printer circuitry. Operation of the START pushbutton causes the current in the sending leg to reverse to a negative polarity with a value equal to the positive current formerly applied (0.015 to 0.040 ampere). The telegraph exchange responds by reversing the current to negative on the receiving leg for 0.025 second. This causes illumination of the proceed to DIAL lamp, at which time the START pushbutton should be released. The dialing signals go out over the sending leg in polar form, each pulse interval consisting of 0.060 second of positive current followed by 0.040 second of negative current. When connection is completed, the exchange reverses the polarity of the receiving leg from positive to negative current. After 0.080 second of this reversal, the call control causes the motor to turn on and the CONN lamp to be illuminated. Traffic can now be exchanged, Each station is arranged to record its transmitted copy. Transmitted and received signals consist of positive current for space and negative current for mark on both signal legs.
(c) When receiving an incoming call, the local exchange reverses the receiving leg current from positive to negative. The local call control, after 0.080 second of negative current, turns on the motor and the CONN light and causes the sending leg current to be reversed from positive to negative.
(d) If the distant station that is called is busy, it will result in the momentary application of negative current to the local receiving leg, followed by a return to a continuous positive current. The motor may run briefly, but the Set will be quickly placed back into the idle condition.
(e) In effecting a disconnect, operation of the STOP pushbutton causes the transmission of positive current on the sending leg. The exchange will then reverse the current on the receiving leg to positive as it breaks connection to the distant station. The call control detects the positive current and, after 1.300 seconds, turns the motor and CONN lamp offasit applies a steady positive current to the sending leg, restoring the Set to the idle condition. If the disconnect is initiated at the distant Set, the positive current disconnect signal, when applied to the local receiving leg, causes the local Set to go into the idle condition after 1.300 seconds and the sending loop becomes positive again.
(f) For local operation, the internal conditions are the same as for neutral signaling. Externally, the signal legs remain on positive current unless a call is received. When a call is received, a negative current on the receiving leg for 0.080 second causes the buzzer to sound for 2.6 seconds, following which the Set shifts to the call-connected condition.
POWER SUPPLY (Figure 7-34) — A fused supply operates on 115 volts a.c. + 10% at 60 cps and a power input of 12 watts. It floats with respect to the input line; that is, it is not at earth ground. Therefore, the center tap of the transformer is + 120 volts to earth ground in neutral signaling. The polar adapter, on Sets equipped for polar operation, also contains a power supply. When operating on a polar line, this power supply, as well as that of the call control assembly, is operated with ground to earth.
d. LOCAL-REMOTE CONTROL CIRCUITS.
(1) General — The local-remote control is a printed card assembly consisting of three circuits that accomplish the switching called for by the input line or operation of the pushbutton key set. These circuits are the "Proceed to Dial," "Connect," and "Local" circuits (see Schematic Wiring Diagram 4779WD). They are essentially binaries (flip-flops) that have been modified to perform their function. All the circuits are protected with a diode arc suppressor against transients and voltage pulses generated by their associated relays. A negative voltage, generated at the collector of a transistor, will be shorted through the diode to resistor R27. The transient will be developed across R27 and the lamp associated with the relay. The diodes performing this function are CR10, CR12, and CR19. The circuits are also protected from transient noise induced into them from leads in the cable to the dial and key and lamp assembly. A low pass filter or delay network of the RC type is placed in
The delay network slows the response time of the associated binary, reducing its susceptibility to noise. These delay networks are made up of R10 and C3, R21 and C4, and R39 and C11. The signal line inputs are filtered against spurious noise occurring on the line. There are two of these filters, both of the RC type. In the "Proceed to Dial" circuit, the delay network (R5 and C1) provides 0.001 second delay. In the "Connect" circuit, the delay network (R12 and C2) provides a 0.020 second delay. The RC network, consisting of R31 and C6, in the 240 volt signal line, acts as an arc suppressor to protect associated contacts.
(2) Proceed to Dial Circuit (Figure 7-35) — This circuit consists of a binary with a line input amplifier. The amplifier consists of transistor Q1 and associated components and the binary consists of transistors Q2 and Q3 and associated components. The amplifier is connected to the binary through a low pass filter or delay network (R5 and C1) which suppresses line noise. Input to the binary from the filter through R6 will turn on the proceed to dial circuit. Two other control inputs turn off the proceed to dial circuit. One of these is through resistor R15 and the other is through pushbutton contact S3-1. Operation of the transistors in the proceed to dial circuit is as follows:
(a) When transistor Q2 is in conduction, its collector is near neutral potential. Current will flow through Q2, R11, S3-1, S3-2, and R27. Current will also flow from +18 volts through R8 and CR9 to the collector of Q2. The base of Q3 will be held 0.8 volt positive with respect to the collector of Q2 due to the current flow through CR9. The base of Q3 will, therefore, be slightly positive with respect to neutral and Q3 will be turned off. With Q3 turned off, its collector will be negative and base current to Q2 will be supplied through the low pass filter consisting of R9, R10, and C3 which holds Q2 in conduction.
(b) When transistor Q3 is in conduction, the proceed to dial circuit is on and the collector is near neutral. Current flows through Q3, K1, XDS-2 and R27. Since the collector Q3 is near neutral, current flow through R7, R9 and R10 produces a positive potential at the base of Q2 which holds Q2 off. With Q2 off, base current for Q3 will flow through CR9, R11, S3-1, S3-2 and R27, holding Q3 in conduction.
(c) If an input current in excess of 0.002 ampere flows from TB-8 across CR4to neutral, a positive potential of 0.8 volt is developed across CR4. This positive potential holds Q1 in conduction and its collector near neutral potential. Neutral potential at this collector has no effect on the base of Q2 because of isolation provided by R5 and R6, If the input current falls below 0.002 ampere, a negative 0.8 volt is developed across CR4 due to the flow of current through R3, R2 and CR4. This potential turns off Q1 and its collector becomes positive. Current flows through R4 and Xd to charge Cl toward a positive 18 volts. When sufficient voltage is developed across Cl, the base of Q2 will be back biased through R6. Transistor Q2 turns off and Q3 turns on. The proceed to dial circuit is now on. Back bias to the base of Q2 is supplied by the voltage divider R7, R9 and R10 so that the positive potential applied across R6 is no longer required to hold Q2 off. If more than 0.002 ampere begins to flow across CR4 again, Q1 will turn on, and its collector will go to neutral, but this will have no effect on the base of Q2.
(d) If negative signal is applied to the side of R15 opposite the base of Q2, enough current will flow to forward bias the base of Q2 and cause it to conduct. Q3 will turn off and supply sufficient base current through R9 and R10 to hold Q2 in conduction. The negative signal on R15 can now be removed and Q2 will remain in conduction.
(e) With the proceed to dial circuit on, Q@3 in conduction, base current for Q3 flows through R11 and CR9. By operating the STOP pushbutton, the current path through S3-1 is broken. Q3 will then turn off and Q2 will turn on. Collector current will not flow in Q2, but will be near neutral, holding Q3 off. When the STOP button is released, collector current will flow in Q2. Proceed to dial is now off.
(3) Connect Circuit (Figure 7-36) — This circuit consists of a binary (Q4 and Q6), one side of which is driven by emitter follower Q5. The only control input to this circuit is by the signal line through R12 and R13. C2 and R12 form a low pass filter or delay network. Signal delay in the network is approximately 0.02 second. A single passive control, consisting of R28 and CR3, is used for low paper conditions:
(a) Transistor Q5 controls the base of Q4. If Q4 is in conduction, its collector is near neutral. Voltage divider R17 aid Rid hold the base of Q6 positive so that Q6 is off. The cullector of Q6 will then be negative and the base R20 and R21. Since Q5 is an emitter follower, its emitter will be held at the same potential as its base. With its emitter at a negative potential, Q4 will be held on.
(b) When the connect circuit is on, Q6 is in conduction and its collector is near neutral. The voltage divider R19, R20 and R21 hoids the base of Q4 and therefore the emitter positive. With the emitter of Q5 positive, the base of Q5 will be back biased and @Q4 will be off. The collector of Q4 will then be negative. Base current for Q6 will flow through R16 and R17 holding the connect circuit on.
(c) To control the connect circuit a high voltage must be developed at the junction of CR1l and CR2. This voltage will be approximately +200 volts. If a +200-volt signal is applied at this point, the base of Q5 will be biased positive and Q4 will turn off, turning on Q6. If a -200 volt signal is applied, the base of Qo will be biased negative and Q4 will turn on, turning Q6 off. An input signal at or near neutral will have no effect upon the connect circuit and it will remain in its prior state.
(d) The base of Q5 is protected against excessively high voltages by transistor operation or by CR11. If a negative 200 volt signal is present, the voltage on the base of Q5 will fall, forcing its emitter to follow. When the emitter of Q5 becomes negative with respect to ground, Q4 will turn on. With Q4 in conduction, its base potential is held close to the emitter potential. Therefore, the base cannot go more negative than approximately -0.4 volt. This action also holds the base voltage of Q4 within -0.4 volt of its emitter. The base voltage of Q5, then, cannot become more negative than approximately -0.8 volt. If a positive 200 volt signal is present at the input, the base of Q5 will start to become positive. The diode CR1 is forward biased to positive base voltages. It will limit the voltage on the base of Q5 to approximately +0.8 volt. Therefore, under the severest input conditions, a voltage swing of more than +0.8 volt is not expected.
(e) Resistors R24, R25 and R26 and capacitor C5 are used where a polar converter is employed. As they are shown connected in 4779WD, they have no effect on the operation of this circuit.
(4) Local Circuit (Figure 7-37) —A binary and a uni-junction transistor timer make up the local circuit. Binary operation of Q8 and Q9 is the same as that of the proceed to dial circuit. There are four input controls available.
(a) Operation of the LOCAL pushbutton turns on the local circuit (Q9 on). When contact S2-1 is closed, base current is supplied to Q9 through R37 and R38 and Q9 will turn on, turning off Q8. If the anode of either CR13 or CR14 is neutral, current flowing through R38 will flow through one of the diodes and not reach the base of Q9. These two diodes allow the local circuit to be turned on only when the proceed to dial and connect circuits are off.
(b) The local circuit can be turned off by operation of either the START or the STOP pushbutton. When the local circuit is on, the base current for Q9 flows through contacts Sl-1 of the START pushbutton and contact S3-1 of the STOP pushbutton. Since the contacts of the two pushbuttons are in series, operating either of them will turn Q9 off.
(c) The uni-junction transistor output will also turn off the local circuit. This transistor (Q7) is a breakdown device. If the voltage on C9 is more negative than approximately -8 volts, the resistance of the junction between the lead connected to C9 and the lead connected to R35 is high. When the voltage on C9 becomes more positive than approximately -8 volts, the resistance of this junction will become very low and C9 will recharge through 235, The increase in current flowing through R35, while recharging C9, will cause an increase in the voltage drop across R35. The positive pulse is coupled through C10 and CR17 to the base of Q9, causing it to turn off and Q8 to turn on. The local circuit is then off. As capacitor C9 is recharged, the resistance of the junction again becomes high.
(d) Capacitor C9 is discharged toward neutral or held at about -18 volts through R32 and R33. If the input to R32 is negative (connect circuit off), the capacitor will be held at -18 volts. If the input to R32 is near neutral (connect circuit on), capacitor C9 will discharge through R32 and R33 toward neutral. At the end of 2.3 seconds interval, the voltage on C9 will be approximately -8 volts and the unijunction will break down and turn the local circuit off as described above.
(5) Circuit Interconnections.
(a) Proceed to dial (see Figure 17-38).
1. In order to turn on the proceed to dial circuit, two conditions must be satisfied. The START pushbutton must be operated and the proper line signal must be received from the exchange. The START pushbutton presents the proper signal to the exchange so that the request to dial is recognized. It also protects the proceed to dial circuit from an open line and long line breaks such as those generated when the dial is operated.
2. The proceed to dial circuit can be turned off in two ways. If the STOP button is operated or the connect circuit operates, the proceed to dial circuit will turn off. Local control is provided by operation of the STOP button, while the connect circuit provides automatic control initiated by the exchange.
(b) The connect circuit is controlled only by the line and therefore has only one input. This input is from line sensing and control as shown in Figure 7-38,
(c) Local Circuit.
1. To turn the local circuit on, three conditions must be satisfied. The proceed to dial and connect circuits must be off and the LOCAL pushbutton must be operated. The input of both the proceed to dial and the connect circuit protect against accidental operation of the local circuit which would otherwise cause an automatic disconnect.
2. The local circuit is turned off by operating the STOP button or the START button or the 2.3 second timer. The START and STOP pushbuttons provide local control of the circuit while the timer provides automatic control. The timer is controlled by the connect circuit which is, in turn, controlled by the line. The timer continues to cscillate as long as the connect circuit is on, but only the first timing pulse is required to turn off the local circuit.
(d) Each of the above three circuits has an input to the line sensing and control. The inputs are in the form of relay contacts which switch the line through the proper internal path in the local and remote control assembly. When either the connect or local circuit is on, a motor control relay is operated. The contacts of the relay are used to turn on the motor of the associated Printer.
(6) Idle Line Condition—In this state all relays and lamps are off. This requires that transistors Q3, Q6 and Q9 be off and that Q2, Q4 and Q8 be in conduction. The output transistor of the motor delay timer is off and the selector magnet driver is marking.
(a) The signal loop is a 240 volt source with 4000 ohms in series. In the idle condition the local-remote control offers 43,800 ohms of local resistance to the signal loop. The flow of loop current in this condition is shown in Figure 7-39, Current flows from TB8, the positive idle terminal, across CR4, through Rio and CRI in paralle! with the base emitter junction of Q4 and @Q5, R13 and R12. From this point, current flows through the dial pulse contacts to terminal TB&. through contacts S1-4 and Si-5 on the START button. Therefore, no signal is developed at the collector unless the START button is depressed, Loop current develops about -200 volts with respect to neutral at point B. This potential holds Q4 in conduction and the connect circuit off (Q6 off).
(c) The selector magnet driver is supplied 0.060 ampere locally to hold the selector magnet. This current is supplied through R23 and flows through contacts hl and wl, the keyboard distributor, and the selector magnet driver to neutral,
(7) Initiating a Call—A call can be initiated with the Set in either idle or local condition by depressing the START pushbutton. This performs three functions. Contacts $1-1 and S1-2 open and turn off the local circuit. Contacts S1-4 and S1-5 open and remove the short from the collector of Q1. The collector will remain at ground since more than 0.002 ampere is flowing through CR4. Contacts S1-3 and S1-5 close shorting the local loop resistance which allows the loop current to rise to 0.060 ampere. The loop current now flows from TB8, through CR4, contact $1-5, contact S$1-3, CR1 and the dial impulse contacts to TB9. Shorting out the local loop resistance causes the voltage at point A to rise neutral. This has no effect on the state of the connect circuit.
(a) Proceed to dial — When the START button is depressed, a proceed to dial pulse will cause the collector of QI to go positive and in turn operate the proceed to dial circuit (turn on Q3). With Q3 in conduction, current will flow through the A(K1) relay and the Dial lamp, causing both of them to be operated. The normally open contact "a" of the A relay will operate the short contacts S1-3 and S1-5 of the START button. Loop current now flows from TB8, through CR4, contact "a,"CR1, and the dial pulse contacts to terminal TB9.
1, With Q3 in conduction, its collector will be near neutral. This holds the junction of R37 and R38 in the Local circuit near neutral through CR13 as the LOCAL button is operated. The local circuit cannot now be turned on. The proceed to dial circuit may be turned off by operating the STOP button. Contacts S$3-1 and S3-2 will open and cause Q3 to turn off as described earlier. With Q3 turned off the Set will revert to the idleline condition and the current loop will be as shown in Figure 7-40, In initiating a call, Uf the START button is released at any time before the proceed to dial pulse is given by the exchange, the Set will revert to the idle line condition. The exchange requires a short time to reset after the START button is released early and should not be reoperated for a few seconds.
(b) Dialing — The dial is in the signal loop at all times, but may be used to transmit information to the exchange only during the proceed to dial and the connect conditions. Since the dial impulse contacts are in series with the loop, operation of the dial will completely break loop current. In order to prevent damage to the dial contacts, an arc suppressor, R31 andC6, is placed across the contacts.
(8) Connection.
(a) Local Connection — If a call is initiated locally, current in the loop will be 0.060 ampere from TB8 to TB9 through the path described in paragraph 7-15.d. (6) before connection. When the loop polarity is reversed by the exchange, current flow is from TB9 to TB8. Diode CR1 becomes reverse biased, stopping current flow except through R12 and R13. This current flow turns off Q4 and turns on the connect circuit (turns on Q6). With Q6 in conduction, the H(K2) relay will operate and the CONN lamp will light. The transfer contacts hl of the H relay will switch and allow loop current of 0.060 ampere to flow through the distributor and selector magnet driver as shown in Figure 7-39. Loop current now flows from TB9, through the dial pulse contacts, CR2, the contacts of hl and wl, the keyboard distributor, the selector magnet driver and CR4 to TB8. Current will also flow through CR15 to operate the motor delay timer and, in turn, the motor control relay (K4) when Q6 is in conduction. Contacts K1 will close and start the motor. Q4 is cut off and its collector is negative. Feedback from the collector of @Q4 to the base of Q2 through R15 will turn off the proceed to dial circuit. The A relay will release and the DIAL lamp will go out. The "a" contact will open, but does not have any effect upon the loop current flow, since it is not now in the current loop. The junction of R37 and R38 is held near neutral from the collector of Q6 through CR14. This prevents operation of the local circuit.
(b) Remote Connection — On an incoming call, the set may be connected remotely while in the idle line or local conditions. The loop path is shown in Figure 7-40 for both of these conditions. The incoming call causes the exchange to reverse the loop polarity. This causes the potential at the junction of CR1l and CR2 to change from -200 volts to approximately +200 volts. The potential causes the connect circuit to operate as described in the paragraph above.
(c) Low Paper Circuit —If the paper in a Printer has become low and the low paper contacts operate, the junction of R12 and R13 will not be allowed to become positive.Q4 cannot be turned off and a connection cannot be made. If low paper occurs during a call, the Set will remain in the connected state since zero potential at the junction of R12 and R13 will not effect the connect circuit. A disconnect will occur in the normal manner, since CR3 will be back biased to a negative potential at the junction of R12 and R13. If a call is initiated locally with a low paper condition, the normal sequence of events willoccur, until a connection is attempted. When the exchange cannot connect, it will reverse the loop polarity and the Set will return to the idle state.
(9) Disconnect.
(a) Local Disconnect — Operation of the STOP pushbutton while in the connect condition opens contacts S3-4 and 83-5, which are in series with the loop, and breaks the loop. When the exchange recognizes the break, it reverses the loop polarity. The reverse polarity is blocked by CR2 and current flows through CR1 along the path shown in Figure 7-40. At point A, -200 volts is developed due to current flow as described in 7-15.d.(6). This potential causes the connect circuit to turn off. The CONN lamp goes out and the H relay releases. The hl contacts return to the blinded condition and the Printer stops running open. The input to the motor delay timer becomes negative and the timer will time out. After 0.550 second the motor control relay releases and the motor will turn off. This delay allows the Printer clutches to latch.
(b) Remote Disconnect — The operation of the circuits and the loop paths are the same as those described in 7-15.d(8)(b). The STOP button is not operated locally, but the signal conditions appear identical to the local-remote control.
(10) Local Off-Line Operation — When the Set is in the idle line condition, operation of the LOCAL pushbutton will cause the local circuit to operate (Q9 turns on), If the control is in the proceed to dial or connect conditions, CR13 or CR14 will prevent operation of the local circuit. When the local circuit operates, the W relay operates and the LOCAL lamp will light. Contact wl of the W relay will short out contacts in the keyboard-selector magnet driver loop. Current to this loop will then flow through R23, wl, the keyboard and the selector magnet driver to neutral. Current will also flow through CR16 to turn on the output transistor of the motor delay timer. The motor control relay will operate and the motor will start. The Printer is now ready for off line operation. To return to the idle line condition, the STOP button may be depressed. Contacts $3-1 and S3-2 open and turn off the local circuit. A call may be initiated in the local condition in the usual manner, When the START button is depressed contacts S1-1 and S1-2 open and turn off the local circuit in the same way as the STOP button.
(a) If an incoming call is received while the Set is in the local condition, the action of the circuit is the same as that described in 7-15.d. (6) (a) and (b). The H relay operates to shunt the line through the keyboard distributor and selector magnet driver, but this operation cannot be accomplished, since the wl contacts have shorted the hl contacts out of the circuit. Operation of the h2 contacts will complete the 117 v.a.c. circuit to the buzzer causing it to sound.
(b) When the connect circuit is turned on, the collector of Q6 approaches neutral. This causes the timer to start. At the endof a 2.3 second period, a positive pulse from the timer is coupled to the base of Q9 through C10 and CR17. The pulse causes the local circuit to turn off, the LOCAL lamp to be extinguished and the W relay to be released, The wl contacts short the signal loop through the keyboard distributor and selector magnet driver. The w2 contacts open and the buzzer will turn off. The Set is now in the connect condition,
e. SELECTOR MAGNET DRIVER (Figure 7-41).
(1) The selector magnet driver, combined with an external power transformer, a resistor and a filter capacitor, provides 0.500 ampere for driving a selector magnet from a telegraph signal source of appropriate input line current. The input signals are applied through terminals 7 and 13, with Rl determining the switching level. The operation of the circuit, in general, is the same as that described for TWX application in paragraph 7-14.e.
(2) For mark input, positive current is applied to terminal 7, providing a positive bias to the base of transistor Ql that overcomes the normal negative bias supplied through Rl and stablized by Zener diode ZD1. Q1 turns off as the increasing positive current reaches one-half of its final value. The collector of Q1 goes negative, and the drop across the collector load resistor R3 is applied to the base of Q2, turning Q2 on, R4 provides emitter bias to Q1, and supplies a regenerative action to the transistion,
(3) The selector magnet, in series with the external resistor, is connected between the collector of Q2 at terminal 6 and negative battery at terminal 15, and supplies the load for Q2. On marks, the current through Q2 quickly rises to 0.500 ampere, as set by the external resistor, and energizes the selector magnet.
(4) On space input, the positive input bias decreases and Q1 is turned on at the half line current point by negative bias through Rl. The collector of Ql rises toward zero, applying reverse bias to Q2, turning off Q2, and de-energizing the selector magnet. The magnet opposes the change in current and applies a transient to the collector of Q2 which is more negative than the battery potential at terminal 15, CR3 now conducts, passing the transient to Cl and R5 which limit the transient to a value well under the breakdown voltage of @2, while the magnet energy is being dissipated.
f, MOTOR DELAY TIMER (Figure 7-42).
(1) The motor delay timer provides a means to delay motor turn-off in the Printer, allowing the Printer to complete its printing cycle and come to rest before the motor begins to Stop. This circuit is mounted on the same circuit card assembly with the selector magnet driver but is electrically independent of it. It is designed to drive a motor control relay connected between points 3 and 5 and is operated when either the connect or local circuit is on.
(2) The motor delay timer consists of a regenerative switch (Q3 and Q4) and an output driver (Q5). The input to the timer is from the collector of Q9 through diode CR16 or from the collector of Q6 through diode CR15 in the local and connect circuits of the local-remote control assembly. The diodes provide insulation between the input of the timer and the transistors of the local-remote control for negative Signals. When the input of the timer at point 2 is grounded, the output driver will turn on immediately. When the input signal is removed, the output driver will remain in conduction for approximately 0.550 second, holding the motor control relay operated long enough to allow the Printer to complete its printing cycle before turning off the motor.
(3) When a negative input signal is applied to point 2, base current to Q3 will flow through R7, R8 and R9, Q4 will be held in conduction by base current flowing through R12 and R13. The collector of Q3 will be at approximately -1.6 volts. The voltage divider, R12 and R13, will hold the base of Q5 positive and Q5 will be cut off,
(4) If ground is now applied to the input, the base of Q3 will approach ground and become reverse biased, turning it off. The collector of @3 will become -10.0 volts. This voltage will cause the voltage at the base and the emitter of the emitter follower Q4 to be -8.5 volts. The emitter of Q3 will be held at -8.5 volts by the emitter of Q4, holding Q3 off, The -10.0 volts at the collector of Q3 will cause base current to flow to @5 through CR7, CR8 and R12, @9 will then go into conduction, operating the external motor control relay.
(5) If the ground input is now removed, current will flow through R7 and R8, charging C2 toward -18 volts, After about 0.550 second, the voltage on C2 reaches -8.5 volts, the voltage on the emitter, and Q3 goes into conduction with its collector going less negative. This causes the base of Q4 and therefore the emitter of Q3 and Q4 to become less negative. The process continues until both Q3 and Q4 are saturated, C2 will then discharge through R9 and the base of Q3 to ground, Base current to hold Q3 in conduction is supplied through R7, R8 and R9,
(6) At 25 degrees C. with 390 ohm output load, the delay of the timer is from 0.475 second to 0.675 second when the supply voltages are within 3% of their nominal values.
g, POLAR ADAPTER-TELEX (Figure 7-43).
(1) The following description is based upon schematic Wiring Diagram 5923WD.
(2) The Polar Adapter converts the types of Signals received from the receiving leg and the printer intothose usable by the circuitry and the sending leg. Some of the functions of the relay contacts are modified by the Polar Adapter, but they serve the same general purpose. The outward operations of the Control Unit, with the Polar Adapter attached, are identical to those of the Control Unit alone.
(3) The Polar Adapter consists electrically of four basic parts. These parts are:
(a) The Receiving Polar Relay - This relay converts the received signals into those usable by the circuitry of the Adapter and the Control Unit.
(b) The Sending Polar Relay - This relay converts the make-break signals generated by the keyboard distributor into transmitted line Signals.
(c) The Connect Control Timer - This circuit is made up of four basic parts and differentiates between control and information signals.
(d) The Current Amplifier - This circuit amplifies the signals of the Receiving Polar Relay to control the Selector Magnet Driver.
(4) The Adapter operates on a three wire basis. Two of these wires are the sending and receiving legs. The third wire is an earth return for these twolegs. The Adapter will, therefore, not operate unless earthground is supplied. The chassis of the Adapter is grounded to the power supply. When installed in the Control Unit, electrical connection is made through the chassis contact to the third wire in the power plug. This third wire in the power cord must be connected to a suitable earth ground.
(5) The Sending and Receiving Polar Relays are of the non-bridging mercury wetted contact type. They are housed in metal cylinders with an 11 pin tube socket at their base. Because of the mercury in the relay capsule, they must be operated within 30° of vertical, to prevent shorting of the contacts.
The coils of the relay are as follows:
Pins 2 and 11 - Drive coil
Pins 3 and 10 - Drive coil
Pins 5 and 9 - Bias coil
Pins 6 and 8 - Bias coil
Pins 1 and 7 - Contacts
Pin 4 - Tongue
In the Adapter, contact 7 has been chosen as the SPACING contact and contact 1 as the MARKING contact. To close contact 1 and the tongue, current must flow from either pins 2 to 11, 3 to 10, 9 to 5, or 8 to 6.
(6) All relay contacts are protected by arc Suppressors. These arc suppressors slow the rate of change of voltage across the mercury wetted contacts of the relays. On the Receiving Polar Relay, the arc suppressors are made up of R32, R33, C5 and C6. On the Sending Polar Relay, they are made up of R43, R44, C7 and C8.
(7) All voltage sources are isolated by at least 120 ohms. In the event of a momentary Short, current through the relay contacts or the connectors is limited to one ampere or less. If a short is of long duration, the resistor will act like a fuse and open the shorted circuit. These resistors are R34, R36, R38, R41 and R42.
(8) When polar signals are being transmitted by the Sending Polar Relay, a noise suppressor is used in the sending leg. This suppressor consists of a "pi" filter and is made upof C114, C11B and R45. The filter rejects all high frequency components of the transmitted signal. It is not used when neutral signals are transmitted.
(9) The Receiving Polar Relay
This relay andits associated components convert incoming signals into those usable by the circuitry of the Adapter and the Control Units.
Several types of input signals tothis relay are possible. These modes of operation may be selected by appropriate strapping of the binding posts on the 181607 printed card assembly. The various modes of operation are:
(a) Polar signals, battery supplied remotely. This is the normal mode of operation and all Adapters are supplied with strapping for this type of operation. Refer to Wiring Diagram 5923WD.
(b) Neutral signals, battery supplied by the Adapter. In this condition, posts 3 and 4, 5 and 7, and 12 and 13 are strapped together.
(c) Neutral signals, battery supplied remotely (battery negative). In this condition, posts) and 12, 6 and 13, and 3 and 4 are strapped together.
(d) Neutral signals, battery supplied remotely (battery positive). In this condition, posts 3 and 4, 12 and 13, and 5 and 6 are strapped together.
With the wiring as described above, a SPACING signal will cause the tongue (4) of the relay to rest on the SPACE contact (7). With a MARKING signal, the tongue will rest on the MARK contact (1). The tongue (4) of the relay is supplied with +120 volts through R34. It supplies this voltage to the selected contact, while the other contact has no potential applied. Both contacts have two outputs. One of these is a voltage or direct output, while the other is a current output. The current output is through a diode and a resistor and will supply approximately .010A to ground. The diode prevents reversed currents from flowing, when the contact is not supplied with +120 volts from the tongue. The output diodes andresistors are CR11, CR12, R30 and R31.
The bias for this relay, when used in neutral operation, is .030A. and is supplied through R37 and strapped terminals 3 and 4. Operating current for neutral operation, when supplied locally, is supplied from -120volts and is limited to .060A. by R46 and the signal line resistance.
(10) Sending Polar Relay
This relay converts the neutral make-break signal generated by the keyboard distributor and the dial into those required on the sending leg. There are a variety of possible signal types that can be transmitted. These are:
(a) Polar signals, battery supplied by the Adapter. This is the normal mode of operation and all Adapters are supplied with strapping for this type of operation. Refer to Wiring Diagram 5923WD.
(b) Neutral signals, battery supplied by the Adapter. In this condition, posts 10 and 11 are strapped together and the straps between 8 and 9, 14 and 15, and 16 and 17 are cut.
(c) Neutral signals, battery supplied remotely. In this condition posts 6 and 10 are strapped together and straps between 8 and 9, 10 and 11, 14 and 15, and 16 and 17 are cut.
Since both the drive and bias windings are wired in series, both windings are supplied with the same amount of current. The input current of .021A to the drive windings is supplied through R40 from +120 volts. The .021A to the bias is supplied through R39 from +120 volts.
(11) Connect Control Timer
This circuit consists of four basic parts on the 181606 assembly. These are: a strobe pulse generator, two timing transmission gates, and binary.
The strobe pulse generator generates a 120 cps square wave. This square wave and the outputs from the Receiving Polar Relay are used as inputs to the two timing transmission gates. The outputs of these two gates are used to control the binary. The output of the binary, in turn, is used to control the "Connect" circuit in the Control Unit.
The strobe pulse generator is made up of Qi and Q2 and associated components. It is controlled and caused to oscillate by AC from the power transformer of the Control Unit. This 12.5 VAC (18 volt peak) sine wave is rectified by CRl and CR2 toform a negative 120 cps wave. The base of Q1 isbiased by R2 and R3, such that -3.9 volts is necessary at the junction of CR1 and CR2 to turn on Q1. When base current does flow to Q1, it will turn on and its collector will become nearly ground. R4 and R5d form a voltage divider, which back biases the base of Q2, holding it off. The voltage at the collector of Q2 will be set by a voltage divider made up of R8 and R9. This voltage is -9.1 volts. Feedback, of Q1, will help provide "snap-action".
When the 120 cps wave becomes more positive than -3.9 volts, base current to Q1 will cease to flow. The coiiector of Qi will become -5.7 volts. Base current to Q2 will flow through R5, causing it to turn on, and its collector will become very nearly ground. This circuit will continue to oscillate as described as long as power is applied to the Control Unit transformer.
Two one-percent tolerance resistors (R8 and R9) in the collector of Q2 set the voltage at that point at -9.1 volts. This voltage level is important in controlling the binary and setting the proper time delay intervals in the timing gates. The square wave generated at the collector of Q2 will be ground for approximately .0013 seconds and -9.1 volts for approximately .007 seconds,
When a SPACING signal is present on the receiving leg, +120 volts is applied to contact 7 and no voltage is applied to contact 1 of the Receiving Polar Relay. No voltage will appear across R28 and the voltage at the junction of R28 and R26 is set by current flow through CR10 and R26. This voltage will be approximately -60 volts. CR8 will conduct and the voltage across C3 and at the anode of CR5 will be held at -60 volts. If Q4 is in conduction, its base will be nearly ground and CR5 will be back biased by 60 volts.
The 9.1 volt strobe pulse introduced at C1 will cause the voltage at the anode of CR5 to rise to -50.9 volts. The negative pulse, that follows in .0013 seconds, will lower it to -60 volts. The net result of these strobe pulses upon the voltage on C3 is, therefore, zero and CR5 is not forward biased at this time.
When a MARKING signal appears on the receiving leg, +120 volts is applied to one side of R28 through the MARKING contact of the Receiving Polar Relay. The voltage divider consisting of R26 and R28 sets the voltage at their junction at +22 volts and back biases CR8. This isolates C3 from R26 and R28. C3 will now begin to discharge through R20 from -60 volts toward ground. The voltage at the anode of CR5 will follow, thus reducing the back bias on CR5. After approximately .080 seconds the voltage on C3, and therefore at the anode of CR5, will have risen to -9.1 volts. The next strobe pulse to appear at C1 will cause CR5 to become slightly forward biased and part of the pulse will appear at the base of Q4.
The gate just described is the connect timing gate and produces a signal delay of approximately .080 seconds. The disconnect timing R27 is from the SPACING contact. When MARK appears on the receiving leg, R25 and CR9 hold the voltage on C4 at -60 volts. When a SPACING signal appears, CR7 will be back biased and C4 will discharge through R19 from -60 volts toward ground. In approximately 1.300 seconds, the voltage across C4, and therefore at the anode of CR4, will become more positive than -9.1 volts. The next strobe pulse introduced across C2 will cause CR4 to be forward biased and part of the strobe pulse willappear at the base of Q3.
C3 will recharge to -60 volts from -9.1 volts in .004 seconds. C4 will recharge in .010 seconds. Both of these recharge times are less than one code element length and can be considered instantaneous.
The outputs of the transmission gates control the binary, which is made up of Q3 and Q4 and associated components. The operation of this binary is similar to that of the binaries in the Control Unit. The controlof the binary by the transmission gates is the same as that of the 2.3second timer controlling the "Local" circuit in the Control Unit. A positive pulse at the base of Q4, through CR5, will turn off Q4 and turn on Q3. The collector of Q3 will then be near ground. Current will flow through R35 and through ZD1 to the collector of Q3. The cathode of ZD1 will be 9.1 volts positive with respect to its anode, so that the voltage at the cathode will be +9.1 volts. This point is the output to the "Connect" circuit of the Control Unit.
A positive pulseat the base of Q3 through CR4 will turn off Q3 and turn on Q4. The collector of Q3 will go negative. Current flow through CR6 and R23 will hold this voltage to -18 volts. Current flow through R35 and ZD1 will hold the voltage at the cathode of ZD1 9.1 volts positive of -18 volts. The output will then be -8.9 volts. Anegative output (Q3 off) will hold the "Connect" circuit of the Control Unit off and a positive output (Q3 on) will hold the "Connect" circuit on.
(12) Current Amplifier
This circuit is made up of Q5 and associated components on the 181606 assembly. Base current to this amplifier is supplied through CR12 and R31 from the MARKING contact of the Receiving Polar Relay.
If ground is applied to the emitter of Q5 through CR3 or by strapping binding posts 1 and 2, the base is back biased by the voltage divider made up of R13 and R14. If base current is now supplied, the transistor will turn on. With the collector load as shown in 5923WD and Figure 7-45. .060A of collector current will flow.
If the ground to the emitter of Q5 through CR3 is switched to +120 volts, CR3 will become back biased. The emitter is biased to near +18 volts through R12. Since both the emitter and collector are biased to +18 volts, no currect will flow between them. Base current supplied to the transistor will flow into both the collector and emitter. The current in the collector will flow from the base, through the collector, the Selector Magnet Driver and R23 to +18 volts. This current flow is in the reverse direction of the normal control current for the Selector Magnet Driver and it will be held SPACING.
The amplifier will supply MARKING current only when ground is applied to the emitter and base current is supplied. If either of these conditions is not fulfilled, the Selector Magnet Driver willnot be supplied input current and its output will be SPACING.
Strapping post 1 and 2 will permanently apply ground to the emitter and allow duplex operation of the printer.
(13) Circuit Interconnections
Figure 7-43 is a block diagram showing the Polar Adapter connected to the Control Unit. The Control Unit portion of the diagram is the same as thatshown in Figure 7-39, with one exception. The Line Sensing and Control block of the Control Unit is rewired through the connectors (J4, J5 and J6) and is now called the Sending Loop Control. All of the components are identical in these two blocks, but rewiring allows the block to control the sending leg rather than the signal loop. This block also has outputs to the Current Amplifier and the Selector Magnet Driver. The input to the Current Amplifier allows the printer to read its own copy. The input directly to the Selector Magnet Driver is for printer blinding.
The Receiving Polar Relay MARKING contact supplies inputs to both the Connect Control Timer and the Current Amplifier. The input to the Current Amplifier allows the printer to read incoming copy. The input to the Connect Control Timer allows the Adapter to recognize a connect signal. The SPACING contact supplies inputs to both the Connect Control Timer and the "Proceed to Dial" circuit of the Control Unit. The input to the Connect Control Timer allows the Adapter to recognize a disconnect signal. The input to the "Proceed to Dial" circuit supplies current for SPACING signals and no current for MARK. This allows this circuit to operate in the normal manner.
(14) IDLE Line Condition
In this condition both the sending and receiving legs are SPACING. All the circuits in the Control Unit are off. The SPACING contact of the Receiving Polar Relay is +120 volts, allowing C4 to be discharged. CR4 will then allow strobe pulses to pass to the base of Q3, holding it off. The output of the Connect Control Timer is then negative, holding the Connect" circuit in the Control Unit off.
Figure 7-44 is a schematic wiring diagram of the Sending Loop Control, along with the Current Amplifier and the Sending Polar Relay. Blinding current to the Selector Magnet Driver flows from +18 volts through R23, J5-2, the Selector Magnet Driver, J4-1, the hl contact, the wl contact, J4-7, and the keyboard to ground. No current flows in the drive coils of the Sending Polar Relay, since neither the Start contact, the a contact nor the hl contact are operated to supply ground.
The MARKING contact of the Receiving Polar Relay has no voltage applied. No base current will then flow from this contact to Q5. The emitter of Q5 is biased to +18 volts through R12. The cathode of CR3 is at +120 volts, supplied through R39 and the sending relay coils, and CR3 is back biased.
(15) Initiating a Call
A call may be initiated when the Control Unit is in either the IDLE line or LOCAL conditions as described earlier. Depressing the START button will allow current to flow through the drive coils of the Sending Polar Relay. This relay will then transmit a MARKING signal on the sending leg. The current path through the coils is shown dotted in Figure 7-44.
Operating the START button will also remove ground from the collector of Q1 in the Control Unit. Current to the input of the "Proceed-to-Dial" circuit (base of Ql) is supplied from the SPACING contact of the Receiving Polar Relay. (Not shown in Figure 7-44). The "Proceed-to-Dial" circuit will not operate until this current is interrupted.
(16) Proceed-to-Dial
The exchange will recognize the MARKING signal transmitted as a request-to-dial. When the exchange has selected the proper equipment, it willtransmit a.025 second MARKING signal on the receiving leg. The Receiving Polar Relay will respond to this signal, interrupting the current flow to the input of the "Proceed-to-Dial" circuit. This circuit will then turn on, energizing the A relay and the Proceed-to-Dial lamp. The a contact will operate, shunting out the Start button contact. The Start button may now be released.
When the Receiving Polar Relay responds to the .025 second pulse, C3 in the Connect Control Timer will start to discharge. After .025 seconds the receiving leg returns to SPACING, causing C3 to be recharged to -60 volts. In the .025 interval, the voltage across C3 will not rise to ~9.1 volts and no strobe pulses will be passed by CR5. The Connect Control Timer, therefore, will not respond to a Proceed-to-Dial pulse.
(17) Dialing
The dial signaling contacts are in series with the drive coils of the Sending Polar Relay as shown in Figure 7-44. The dial contacts will thus energize and de-energize this relay, whenever current is flowing through them. The make-break signal generated by the dial contacts will be transmitted as MARK-SPACE signals by the Sending Polar Relay. These MARK-SPACE signals are used by the exchange to make the necessary connection.
(18) Call Connection
With the Control Unit in the Proceed-to-Dial condition, the sending leg is MARKING and the receiving leg is SPACING. When dialing is completed, the exchange will switch the receiving leg to MARKING. This signal causes the tongue of the Receiving Polar Relay to transfer and apply +120 volts to R28. CR8 will become back biased and C3 will begin to discharge toward ground. After .080 seconds, the voltage across C3 will be approximately -9.1 volts. The next strobe pulse to appear will pass through CR5 to the base of Q4. The output of the Connect Control Timer will then become positive and cause the "Connect" circuit to turn on. As described earlier, the 'Proceed-to-Dial" circuit will turn off. As the "Connect" circuit turns on, the H relay will operate, the hl contacts will transfer, the CONN lamp will light and the motor will turn ON,
Current flow to the drive coils of the Sending Polar Relay is now through R40, the drive coils, the Dial contacts, CR2, the Stop contacts, hl, wl and the keyboard contacts to ground as shown in Figure 7-45. Base current to Q5 is now supplied from the marking contact of the Receiving Polar Relay through CR12 and R31. Input current to the Selector Magnet Driver will flow from +18 volts through R23, the Selector Magnet Driver, Q5, CR3, J4-3, CR2, the Stop contacts. hl. wl and the keyboard contacts to ground.
Both the current paths, for the drive coils of the Sending Polar Relay and the Selector Magnet Driver, are through the keyboard contacts. If the keyboard is operated, the signal will be transmitted on the sending leg and cause the selector magnet of the printer to operate.
Figure 7-44. Sending Loop Control Circuit with Sending Polar Relay (TELEX)
When information is received from the distant station, the Receiving Polar Relay will operate, making and breaking base current to Q5. This will cause Q5 to make and break current flow to the Selector Magnet Driver without affecting the sending circuit.
The longest possible normal spacing signal generated by the distant printer will be less than 1.300 seconds. This is the length of spacing signal required to cause the Connect Control Timer to disconnect. Therefore, under normal signaling, the Connect Control Timer will not be affected by information signals.
(19) Remote Connection
The Control Unit may be connected remotely from either the IDLE Line or LOCAL condition. An incoming call is indicated by the exchange by its transmission of a MARKING signal on the receiving leg. The Connect Control Timer, after .080 seconds, will turn on the "Connect" circuit in the Control Unit. When the hl contacts transfer, a current path to ground is set up through the drive coils of the Sending Polar Relay. It will then transmit a MARKING Signal on the sending leg, to signify that the unit has connected. The remainder of the operations are the same as those described in paragraph g.(18).
If the paper in the machine has become low and the low paper contacts operate, the voltage across C3 will be held at -60 volts through R29. This will stop any connections from occurring. If the Control Unit is already in the Connect condition, when the low paper contacts close, the call may be completed, but subsequent connections will be blocked.
If a call is originated locally with a low paper condition, the normal sequence of events will occur, until the connection is attempted. When the exchange does not receive a MARKING signal on the sending leg, it will return the receiving leg to SPACING (Idle Line condition).
(20) Call Disconnect
If the Stop button is depressed, while the unit is in the Connect condition, the Stop contacts in series with the drive coils of the Sending Polar Relay will open. The relay output will then be SPACING. The exchange will recognize this long SPACING signal as a request to disconnect and will send a SPACING signal on the receiving leg. The Receiving Polar Relay contacts will transfer and allow C4 to discharge toward ground. After 1.300 seconds, the voltage across C4 will be -9.1 volts and the next strobe pulse will pass through CR4 to the base of Q3. The output of the timer will become negative, turning off the "Connect" circuit in the Control Unit. When the hl contacts transfer, current to the drive coils of the Sending Polar Relay will be held off, so that the Stop button may be released. The hl contacts will now also supply blinding current to the Selector Magnet Driver. The Control Unit is now in the IDLE Line condition.
(21) Remote Disconnect
When the remote unit generates the spacing signal to disconnect, the Receiving Polar Relay will allow C4 to discharge and after 1.300 seconds the timer will turn off the "Connect" circuit. The hl contacts will transfer, stopping current flow to the drive coils of the Sending Polar Relay and blinding the Selector Magnet Driver. The Control Unit is now in the IDLE Line condition.
(22) Local Off Line Operation
This operation is identical to that of the Control Unit without Adapter, except for the current path to the Selector Magnet Driver. This path is shown in Figure 7-44.

7-16. CALL CONTROL ASSEMBLY - WADS (5918WD)
a. GENERAL
(1) The call control assembly covered in this paragraph couples the Model 33 Printer through a Data Set totelephone networks for use in Bell System Wide Area Data Service (WADS) and Four Row Dial TWX service. In conjunction with the Data Set, it provides facilities for initiating, accepting, controlling, and completing calls. This paragraph is based on wiring diagram 5918WD. Other associated wiring diagrams are 4404WD, 4405WD, 4406WD, 4412WD,4413WD, 4470WD, 4973WD, and 4979WD.
(2) The call control assembly, when used with the 101C or 105A Data Set, is connected with conventional telephone central offices having the required routing and message accounting equipment. These are generally the same offices and equipment serving telephone customers in the area. Direct current signals are used for both originating and terminating traffic, providing the same conditions as for conventional local telephone set operation. The dial on the set, for initiation of call connections, may be either a d.c. pulsing or multi-frequency tone device. Also included in the set are ringing or tone sounding apparatus for alerting the called party.
Figure 7-45. Receiving Loop Control Circuit with Receiving Polar Relay (TELEX)
(1) The call control assembly provides for signaling speeds of 100 WPM from d.c. marking and spacing intelligence pulses originating from the distributor in the associated Printer. These pulses are directed to the input of the selector magnet driver in the call control assembly where they are amplified and returned to the printer as 0.500 ampere d.c. pulses to operate the selector magnet.
(2) If the originate (ORIG) key on the call control assembly has been depressed and connection with a "called' station satisfactorily completed, the intelligence pulses originated by the distributor are also connected with the Data Set. The Data Set converts the d.c. pulses to tone signals for transmission over telephone lines. Another Data Set, located at the "called" station, converts the tone signals back to d.c. pulses, which are directed to the input of the selector magnet driver there, to operate the selector on the Printer of the "called" station. The Printer at a given station normally copies both the transmitted and received d.c. signals, operating on a half duplex basis.
c. ORIGINATING A CALL - To originate a call, the ORIG nonlocking key is momentarily operated. This connects the station to the line and lights the ORIG lamp. The lamp remains lit until the originate mode is terminated, If the line is busy, or a wrong number or no connection signal is received, depressing the CLR pushbutton will disconnect the set from the line so the call can be re-made.
d. SPEAKER AMPLIFIER SYSTEM.
(1) The loudspeaker amplifier is powered only after the ORIG key is operated, and is quieted when the station connects. It has two inputs, one from the line via the buffer amplifier in the Data Set limiter and the other from the touch-tone dial (TTD). Three outputs are provided: (1) into the loudspeaker or optional hand held receiver, (2) into the line through the sending amplifier in the Data Set, and (3) an auxiliary output into the Data Set. The line to loud-speaker connection permits monitoring of supervisory signals when originating a call. The touch-tone dial-to-line and touchtone dial-to-loudspeaker connection provides for amplification of the outgoing multifrequency dialing signals and for monitoring them during outpulsing, The line-to-second output connection is provided for the dial tone detector (when furnished). The various connections mentioned are established by switching in the data set, and by the common switch in the touchtone dial,
(2) The speaker amplifier is a conventional direct coupled 2-transistor audio amplifier. The input signals from the line are fed through the receiving buffer amplifier in the Data Set into the primary winding of the input transformer, The primary winding continuously carries approximately 4 ma quiescent current from the receiving buffer amplifier. The other input, from the TTD, is fed directly into Ql through C5A. Both inputs are d.c. isolated from the amplifier stages.
(3) Two outputs are taken from transistor Q2A, one from the collector circuit and the other from the emitter,
(a) The collector output is fed through a step down output transformer (T2) into the loudspeaker (or receiver). Potentiometer RS is used to set proper volume for varying loop loss and ambient noise level. The TTD Signals are independent of loop loss.
(b) The emitter output splits into two signal lines: one for injecting the multifrequency (MF) dial tones into the Data Set sending amplifier, and the other for feeding the dial tone detection circuit (when provided). The signal level from the emitter output is essentially independent from the setting of potentiometer RS.
(4) By-passed R6A is a supply voltage dropping resistor. Diode CR1A is provided to block a sneak path (in the answer mode) from ground through the ANS and ORIG lamps. Without the CR1A, the ORIG lamp would be dimly lit and the amplifier would not be silent, when the station is in the answer mode. The amplifier operates only in the originate mode until the station connects. In any mode other than originate, the ground is disconnected. When the station connects, the amplifier input is short circuited in the Data Set.
e. DIAL MECHANISMS
(1) Rotary Pulsing Dial - For pulse dialing application, a pulsing contact of the rotary dial is inserted in the telephone line. The manual rotary dial is equipped with a normally closed pulsing contact and a normally opened off-normal contact. The pulsing contact is inserted into the telephone line when the station originates a call. When answering, a short circuit is applied across the pulsing contact. The off-normal contact is placed across the output of the amplifier, and silences the loudspeaker whenever the dialing disk is moved.
(2) Pulsing Card
(a) To use the card dialer, the ORIG key is operated, After dial tone has been received, a card with the telephone number punched in it is inserted in the slot and entirely pushed in. This operation winds a spring motor, which later pushes the card out of the slot as the dialing proceeds.
(b) The dialer is started by momentarily depressing the START bar. This operates the dial START contact, and establishes a path from the ring side of the telephone line through point 5 on the dialer, the released pulsing relay contacts K (P), released HOME and dial START contacts, operated dial START contacts, and point 2 on the dialer to the tip side of the telephone line. The current from the central office battery operates the pulsing relay K (P), which transfers the ring to tip path to the Matrix. This path is closed or opened according to the code punched in the card. The dial pulse is transmitted as the sensing springs sense the holes in the card.
(c) Sending of the dial pulse means interruption of the current in the telephone line. This releases the K (P) relay. Movement of the K (P) relay armature rotates the scanning drum by 1/16 revolution so that the next digit pulse can be sensed and transmitted as the K (P) relay reoperates. After two pulses have been transmitted, the HOME contacts operate and remain operated until the end of the scanning drum revolution. This establishes a direct operating pathfor the K (P) relay so that, when the station is returned on-hook in the middle of the digit, the digit pulsing can be completed and the drum will be returned to its normal (HOME) position.
(d) In this manner, the drum completes the revolution in 16 steps. 10 of the steps are required to send the digit, and 6 to provide the interdigital time. At the completion of revolutions, an escapement is tripped which permits the next row of holes on the card to be placed in position for sensing.
(e) This sequence is repeated at each row as the card advances out of the dial. If no STOP code is punched in the card, the dialer will keep advancing the card (even if no number code is punched) until the card is released, If the STOP code is sensed, the dial STOP contacts operate. With the HOME contacts released, a transmission path is established from the telephone line to the Data Set input as follows: RING - point 5, dial STOP contacts operated, HOME contacts released, point 1, hybrid coil in the Data Set, TIP. The Data Set can then complete the connection.
(f) When the station is connected, No attempt should be made to release the card by reoperating the START bar, as this will trigger the dialing mechanism and the following short circuit will be placed across the output of the Data Set; point 1, HOME and dial START contacts released, dial START contacts operated, point 2. And, after the two first pulses on each revolution: point 1, HOME contacts operated, point 6. This shunt will prevent the station from receiving or sending until the card is disengaged. If this condition persists, the Data Set will disconnect.
(3) Touch-Tone Dial
(a) For multifrequency dialing (MF) application, the dialing frequencies generated by the touch-tone dial are fed through the loudspeaker amplifier and into the telephone line via the sending amplifier in the Data Set. The touch-tone dial can be equipped with the card dialer. To use it, the ORIG key is operated, creating the off-hook condition. When dial tone is received, the card is inserted and the START bar operated. The spring motor wound by insertion of the card pushes the card of the dialer past sensing contacts. The contacts determine dialing frequencies generated by the associated touch-tone dial. If the STOP code is punched in the card following the address, the dialing stops when the STOP code is read, The card should then be released by reoperating the START bar. Dialing proceeds much faster than with the pulsing card dialer. As the station connects, the output of the touch-tone dial is disconnected from the data set so that there is no hazard connected with improper operation of touch-tone dial or card dialer at that time.
(b) The touch-tone multifrequency (MF) Signal generator is a one transistor oscillator generating two frequencies any time a single push-button is operated. Seven frequencies are provided with each dial digit corresponding to two frequencies according to the table below:
(c) When the station is idle, a current of about 25 ma flows from ground through RT resistance of point 1 of the touch-tone dial; then through varistors RV3 and RV4, resistor R1, and out of point 6 to -20V in the Data Set. The transistor Qi is energized, so that there will be no click when the circuit starts to generate the MF signal. The oscillations are suppressed by DC current through the tank coils T1 and T2 maintained by the potential difference across RV4. By interrupting this initial coil current the oscillation's build up time is minimized.
(d) To dial a digit, a pushbotton on the dialing plate is operated. This closes two frequency determining contacts, one for the T1-C1 tank circuit, and the other for the T2-C2 tank circuit. The Common Switch (CS) operates in following sequence:
1. y-z contacts open, making the loudspeaker amplifier input available to MF signal only,
2. s-t contacts close, and establish a path from the loudspeaker amplifier, through the Sending amplifier in the Data Set, and into the line. The feedback through the receiving buffer amplifier in the Data Set back into the loudspeaker amplifier is disabled by previously opened y-z contacts.
3. wo-v contacts open, disabling the receiving buffer amplifier in the Data Set. This eliminates a possibility of false connect due to MF signals,
4. q-p contacts open, together with wo-v contacts, resetting the dial tone detecting circuit when furnished.
0. Wj-u contacts open, interrupting the dc current through the tank coils. Since the tanks T1-Cl and T2-C2 are coupled to the coils in Q1 circuit, the unit starts oscillating with a very short build-up time. The same functions could be assured with wg-v contacts operating first and y-z contacts eliminated. However, the interruption of current in the primary coil of the input transformer in the loudspeaker amplifier would cause a loud click to be heard every time a digit is dialed.
(e) The frequencies above 1000 cycles per second are generated at a somewhat higher level to compensate for greater line loss at those frequencies. Also, there is a variation of amplitude for various digits. The PT resistor is set at the time of assembly of the Attendant Circuit with the Data Set for an output of O dbm on the line for the digit with highest output level.
(4) Touch-Tone and Card Dialer
(a) To use the automatic card dialer, the ORIG key is operated. After the dial tone has been received, a punched card is inserted into the slot and pushed down. The START bar is then momentarily operated. The card dialer proceeds with dialing under power of a spring motor wound by insertion of the card when a STOP code is read, the dialing stops. The card should then be released by reoperating the START bar.
(b) As seen in the wiring diagram, the sensing contacts in the card dialer areinparallel with the frequency determining contacts in the associated touch-tone dial. As the card advances out of the slot, the sensing contacts sense the holes punched in the card determine the proper frequencies to be transmitted. This occurs for every row on the card. The normally opened E contacts in the card dialer are placed across the excitation contacts in the TTD. Whendialing manually, the E contacts are opened and there is no interference from the card dialer. With the card down in the slot, the operation of the START bar closes the E contacts and operates the common switch, through mechanical linkage, for the duration of dialing. The common switch connects the input and output circuits of the loudspeaker amplifier as described inparagraph (3)(d) above. Opening of the Ww i-u contacts transfers the excitation function to the E contacts in the card dialer. As the card advances out of the slot, the E contacts open for each row exciting the TTD into generating the MF dial Signals.
(c) During dialing, there are short intervals of time when all the sensing contacts are opened and the E contacts are open. Therefore, the TTD will break into spurious oscillations somewhere between 7 KC-14 KC. Although this frequency band is suppressed by the telephone line, these frequencies would be noticeable on the loudspeaker. The action of capacitors CT and C4A in the loudspeaker amplifier combine to suppress this spurious signal from reaching the loudspeaker.
(d) Since the card advances out of the slot very rapidly, there is no need for a separate release bar. When station connects, relay contacts in the Data Set (CON 8 in101C) disconnect the MF signal input and remove any hazard connected with false operation of the MF dials.
f. ANSWERING A CALL - MANUAL AND AUTOMATIC
(1) Manual manually, momentarily depress the ANS push-button. This connects the station to the line, and lights the ANS lamp. The lamp remains lit until the answer mode is terminated. Manual answering is necessary only when the automatic answer-back circuit is disabled. The automatic answer-back circuit is disabled by the tabulating contacts, form feed contacts, low paper contacts, Data Set relay contacts (when in local mode), and the out of service switch.
(2) Automatic Answer-Back - The answer-back drum is allowed to rotate by pulsing the armature coil from either the Data Set, WRU contacts in the Printer Set stunt box, or the Here Is key. When the Data Set at an answering station makes a complete connection to the sending station, it puts ground on the answer-back coil circuit, and allows the coil to energize and trip the answer-back. Since ground is maintained on this circuit throughout a call, a non-repeat mechanism is added to the answer-back package which allows the answer-back mechanism to operate only once.
g, SIGNAL GENERATION - The Printer Set can send by operating the keyboard, answer-back mechanism, or break key. The keyboard signal generator contacts and answer-back contacts are in parallel with the signal generator (distributor), which is, in turn, connected to the Data Set. The break key connects to the Data Set via separate leads.
h. SELECTOR MAGNET DRIVER
(1) General - The Data Set supplies a 20 milliampere DC signal to the selector magnet driver associated with the page printer. The selector magnet driver amplifies the signal to 500 milliamperes to operate the selector on the page printer. The selector magnet driver is a two stage transistorized amplifier capable of switching high output currents (0.500 ampere) at very closely controlled input current levels. The output of the driver is automatically regulated and is essentially independent of normal variations in power supply voltage and of selector magnet and current limiting resistance values.
(2) Circuit Description
(a) Open Line: When the line circuit is open (SPACING), transistor Q1 will be turned on by the regulated current flowing through R1 into its base. This current, which is controlled by R1, will be set near the desired switching level. With Qi conducting, Q2 will be cut off, since the potential at the base of Q2 will be more positive than at the emitter. In this condition, only small leakage currents will flow in the collector circuit.
(b) Space-To-Mark Transition: As the SPACE-to-MARK transition begins, the negative bias current flowing in the base of Q1is diverted to the line circuit. As the line current rises toward the MARKING current value, it extracts base current from Ql. When the line current approaches the total current supplied to the base of Ql to within 0.001 ampere, which is about one half the nominal mark current value, Q1 begins to turn OFF. Q2 will then begin to receive forward bias current from R8 and begin to turn ON. The base curent will then be amplified by Q2, and a current which is a multiple of the base current will appear in the emitter circuit. This increase in emitter current results in an increase in the negative potential measured across R38. The increase in the negative potential at the emitter of Q1 causes it to go further into cut-off, The feedback process continues until the current in the selector magnet reaches a value which is determined by the zener reference voltage, clamp diode CR4, and the emitter resistance of Q2 (the emitter resistance of Q2 is adjusted by R4 to compensate for component variations). As the line current completes the transition to the final marking current value, the base of Q1 becomes positively biased. The positive bias current will be approximately one-half the total marking line current. The positive potential to the base of Q1 is clampedto approximately 0.6 volts by the input protecting varistor, CR5.
(c) Mark-to-Space Transition — The line current, in changing from MARK-to-SPACE, will finally reach the point where R1 will begin to supply some forward current to the base of Ql. The line current level at which this occurs will be a little more negative than the point at which the circuit switched from space to mark, due to the common emitter resistor voltage feedback. As Q1 begins to turn ON, the current through R8 will be diverted from the base of Q2 causing it to begin to turn OFF. As Q2 turns OFF, the voltage across R4 will beginto go positive, causing Q1 to be further turned ON. This effect gives regeneration to the MARK-to-SPACE transition.
(d) Mark-to-Space Switching Transient - When Q2 is turned off during the MARK-to-SPACE transition, a negative voltage transient is developed at its collector. This transient is due to dissipation of the energy stored in the magnetic field of the driven magnet when energized by 0.500 ampere. If the high voltage developed at the collector of Q2 is not limited, it would continue to rise until the collcector-to-emitter reach through breakdown voltage is exceeded. It has been found that repeated breakdown of this kind causes deterioration of the transistor, and finally a collector-to-emitter short circuit. Therefore, it is necessary to provide a transient suppressing network at the collector of Q2. The transient suppression network presently in use is a compromise which affords a minimum peak voltage combined with a magnet release time to provide for adequate printer margins. The network consists of C1 in parallel with R9. CR3 isolates the network from voltages more positive than negative battery potential.
i, DISCONNECTING A CALL
(1) A call is normally terminated by the EOT code combination which provides fast disconnect without introducing hit characters. This is accomplished by the Data Set, in response to EOT contact closures in the stunt boxes of both the sending and receiving sets.
(2) A call connection can also be cleared manually by momentarily depressing the CLR pushbutton. This triggers the clearing sequence in the Data Set, and lights the CLR lamp. The CLR lamp will remain lit for the duration of the call. During the first 100 milliseconds of the clearing sequence, the BK lamp will also light.
j. LOCAL MODE - The local mode provides off-line operation of the set. The operator Selects the local mode by depressing the LCL locking key. The LCL key lights the LCL lamp and operates the motor control relay (MCR) to energize the motor. The Data Set connects the Sending circuit to the receiving circuit, and enables the keyboard and answer back to transmit to the page printer. If the set is in a terminal hunting group, the operator must turn the out-of-service switch to the RESTORE position until a dial tone is received after finishing operation in the local mode.
k, OUT-OF-SERVICE SWITCH
(1) The out-of-service switch prevents the automatic answering of incoming calls. In its NORMAL position, it has no effect or function. (Arrow upright); in the OUT-OF-SERVICE position (rotated counterclockwise and detented) it sets the following conditions:
(a) A contact is closed that applies power to the out-of-service light.
(b) A contact is closed that shorts the ringer coils, This makes the ringer inoperative. As an option the contact can be located to shunt both the ringer and series capacitor (i.e., the telephone line). This makes the station appear off hook or busy to the central office.
(c) A contact is opened that breaks the automatic answer circuit to the answer relay. This prevents the relay from operating in response to the ring up relay and thus the set will not answer.
(2) For stations that are not in terminal hunting groups, the operator may return the set to service by turning the out-of-service switch to its NORMAL position. For terminal hunting stations, however, the operator must turn the switch to the RESTORE position and hold it until a dialtone is heard. In this position:
(a) A contact is closed that shorts the tip to ring (off-hook condition). This condition is detected by the central office which then releases the set from lock-out and applies the dial tone.
(b) A contact is closed that completes a path from the speaker amplifier to ground. This permits the amplifier to pass the line signals (dial tone).
l. LOW PAPER ALARM
(1) A low paper alarm is provided in the Printer Set. When a low paper condition occurs, make contacts in the low paper switch provide ground to the low paper buzzer permitting it to operate. Depressing the BUZ RLS key (locking) in the call control unit silences the buzzer and provides an operate path to the BUZ RLS lamp. Attempting to release the key without replenishing the paper supply will result in the buzzer operating, When the paper has been replenished, the set is returned to normal by releasing the BUZ RLS key. When used with more complex circuits, the key can be made non-locking.
(2) Break contacts on the low paper switch disable the automatic answer-back circuit placing the set in a "don't answer" condition. The operator can override the "don't answer" condition by manually answering. If the low paper alarm occurs during a call the operator has the option of completing the call before changing the paper or interrupting the call. To interrupt the call, the operator stops transmission by depressing the Break key followed by depressing the BK RLS key to notify the distant station of the problem. The connection is cleared by simultaneously operating the CONTROL and EOT Keys. Turning the out-of-service switch to the detent position insures that the set will not automatically answer a call while paper is being replenished.
(3) To restore the set to service, after paper has been inserted, depress the CLR button. This enables the low paper buzzer and the answer-back mechanism to return the OUT-OF-SERVICE switch to its normal position. (For sets in terminal hunting groups, turn the switch to its RESTORE position and hold it there. When a dial tone is heard, release the switch.) The set is now in a normal idle operating position.
TEST MODE - If the TST key is operated while the set is connected to a test center, the message sent by the test center will be recorded on the page printer and turned around and sent back for analysis. This is accomplished by connecting the teletypewriter to the Data Set through a set of transfer contacts and a break contact to ground. This type of operation can be terminated by momentarily operating any of the non-locking keys which will then release the TST locking key.

7-17. TAPE READER
a. General - The Tape Reader assembly attaches to the left side of the printer keyboard. The clutch trip mechanism is assembled into the printer distributor. The power pack is attached inside the printer stand. The tape reader is designed to sense code combinations perforated in a tape.
(1) To initiate operation the lid latch handle is moved to the right releasing the lid, and allowing the lid to swing open. The tape is placed on the feed pins in its proper position and lid is closed.
(2) There are three basic positions for the start-stop handle: on, off and free wheeling. in the basic reader only an on-off contact is used in conjunction with the start-stop handle. When the reader is moved to the start position the contact is closed. In the basic unit, this contact is wired inseries with the clutch trip coil which is located in the distributor area of the printer.
(3) The clutch trip coil when energized releases the reader trip lever. The lever when released performs two functions. First, the reader feed magnet contact, which is held open by an insulator on the back side of the trip lever, closes. In its continued travel, a projection on the lever rotates the clutch stop bail releasing the clutch and initiating a distributor cycle.
(4) The feed contact, having closed, causes the reader feed magnet in the reader package to be energized. The magnet, upon energization, attracts, the armature assembly.
(5) The armature in rotating about its pivot, raises the armature extensions. Fastened to the ends of the armature extensions is a sensing pin guide.
(6) The sensing pins are guided, spring biased, and raised into the sensing pin position by means of this guide. Where a hole exists in the tape (marking condition) the pin moves with the guide and the spring is notstretched. Where no hole exists in the tape (spacing condition) the pin is blocked and the spring is stretched.
(7) A contact block is arranged in such a way that insulators on the sensing pins hold the contacts open in the downposition of the pins. These contacts are connected as aparallel output to the individual segments of the printer distributor.
(8) Also, as the armature extensions are raised, a feed pawl which is attached to the inner extension raises, causingit to engage a new tooth on the feed ratchet.
(9) The reader trip lever remains in its tripped position throughout the distributor cycle. Toward the end of the cycle, near the beginning of the stop pulse, a camming roller on the distributor shaft assembly engages a camming surface on the trip lever moving it into its reset position.
(10) If the trip magnet remains energized, as it would where continuous reader operation is desired, the lever will again fall to the tripped position in the sufficient time so the clutch will not stop.
(11) The lever while being reset, opens the reader feeding contact causing the feed magnet to be de-energized until the lever again falls into the tripped position.
(12) The magnet, upon de-energization, releases the armature, lowering the extensions and with drawing the pins from the tape. At the same time, the feed pawl advances the feed ratchet one step.
(13) The feeding and withdrawing of pins is accomplished simultaneously, therefore, the sensing pin guides in the top plate are slotted to permit the pins to travel with the tape for a distance.
(14) Associated with the ratchet are also a detent and a blocking pawl. The detent, with its circular surface engaging the ratchet teeth, serves to hold the ratchet and feed wheel in its correct position during sensing.
(15) The blocking pawl, which rides a pin on the feed pawl, is lowered into engagement with a ratchet tooth during the feed stroke. This is to prevent excessive overthrowof the feed wheel during feeding, without the use of a heavy detent spring. It also prevents the pulling ahead of the tape, during sensing, by a tape winder, without the use of a heavydetent spring. During the upstroke of the armature extensions, the blocking pawl is rotated out of engagement with the tooth by the pin on the feed pawl.
(16) The armature is provided with a spring loaded upstop which serves two purposes: One, a portion of the energy during the end of the stroke is stored in a spring and returned to the armature on the down-stroke to give a rapid release and acceleration; Two, a portion of the energy is dissipated through a resilient buffer to minimize noise and metallic clatter.
(17) The reader is provided with a free wheeling feature. The start-stop lever is pushed beyond its normal detented position. An extension on the handle near the mounting plate of the reader engages and detents itself on a countour on the lower end of the blocking pawl. This causes the blocking pawl to rotate and detent itself in the free wheeling position. A hook, on the bottom side of the blocking pawl, engages the pin on the feed pawl which normally drives the blocking pawl, rotating the feed pawl away from the feed wheel. This same post, moved into this extreme position engages a surface on the detent, pulling and holding it into a position where it clears a feed wheel.
(18) A tight tape feature is also provided. A plastic bail, which snaps onto the tape lid, has on it an extension which projects through the top plate. This extension engages a surface on the tight tape lever. The tight tape lever, which is pivoted on the feed wheel shaft, has an extension which extends below the start-stop contacts in the contact block. When the tape is taut, the tight bail rotates, causing the tight tape lever to also rotate, opening the start-stop contacts and stopping the reader.
(19) A dragging type tape-out pin is also provided. This pin has an insulating extension on it which moves the start-stop contacts open, in a similar fashion, when tape is absent from above the pin.
(20) The tape lid, when closed, is located front to rear and right to left enitrely by a pair of locating pins, integrally molded, which project into apair of locating holes in the top bracket which are closely related dimensionally to both sensing pin guides and feed wheel guide. The hinge, under these conditions, is not functional as no contact is made between the hinge and the top plate in this position.
(21) The lid is held down by a spring biased latch at one end and by the return spring at the other end. This insures positive contact between the lid and the top plate at both ends under all conditions and insures a more reliable tape lid top plate clearance for the tape, without adjustment of a hinge.
(22) When the latch is moved to release the lid, the return spring exerts a torque about one end of the lid surface contacting the top plate, causing the lid to rotate about that edge until the floating hinge pivot (which is semi-cylindrical portion at the end of the lid) moves down far enough to engage a pair of shear-formed tabs, which form a pivoting edge leaves the top plate and the cylinder forms the hinge for the remainder of its travelto the openposition. When open, this floating hinge requires only sufficient accuracy to insure that the locating pin closest to it will engage, or at least pratially engage, the locating hole closest to it and be guided into the hole when the lid is closed. There are, therefore, no hinge adjustments required.

7-18. TAPE PERFORATOR
a. GENERAL - The Tape Perforator assembly attaches to the left side of the printers base casting. The individual mechanisms and subassemblies that form the perforator unit, mount on the perforator base casting which serves as the main structual member.
(1) Rotation of the printer's function shaft provides a pre-determined controlled motion for the power bail assembly. The power bail oscillates from a post mounted to the basé and receives its motion from the printer's function shaft through the drive link. This motion is transferred to the nudger, tape feed mechanism and into the punch mechanism to perform the tape feed functions.
(2) The individual members that compose the power bail assembly perform the following functions:
(a) Drive Post - The drive linkimparts motion to the power bail through the drive-post.
(b) Nudger Arm - There is a cam profile perforated in the nudger arm which transfers motion to the nudger.
(c) Feed Pawl Arm - The feed pawl derives its motion from the feed pawl arm.
(d) Stripper Bail - The stripper bail pivots from a post that is supported by the nudger and feed pawl arms.
(e) Sensing Lever Bail - Motion is transferred to the sensing levers through a post supported by the nudger and feed pawl arms.
(3) There is a code bar extension for each printer code bar. Motion is imparted to the code bar extensions by the code bars thru the printer's code bar reset bail. A bracket and a plate mounted to the perforator base provide the support and the guiding for the code bar extensions.
(a) The perforator receives its intelligence from the printer's selector.
(b) The selector's blocking levers control the mark or space position of the code bar which in turn transfer this position to the code bar extensions. A blocked code bar represents a space and an unblocked code bar represents a mark.
(c) Each code bar extension contains a tab located on its underside which is oriented to line up with its respective sensing lever, pawl, lever and code punch combination.
(4) The tape feed and tape perforation sequence of operation is as follows:
(a) The perforator basically has the same timing as the printer's function mechanism.
(b) The selector trips the code bar clutch at the end of its cycle. The character combination stored in the selectors blocking levers is transferred to the code bar extensions as explained above.
(c) The function clutch is tripped when the code bar reset bail reaches its most counter-clockwise position.
(a) As the power bail rotates counter-clockwise from its stop position the feed pawl engages atooth on the feed wheel ratchet. When the bail reaches its most counter-clockwise position the ratchet has been indexed one full tooth space and the tape has advanced 0.100 inches by the feed wheel.
(e) There is a sensing lever, pawl, lever and code punch combination for each code level.
(f) The feed punch has its own sensing lever, pawl and lever.
(g) During the power bails counter-clockwise travel each sensing lever is permitted to niunt eloaerkwice and cence the code bar extensions. Each sensing lever, except the feed punch sensing lever, contains a tab onits top side which lines up with its respective code bar extension.
(h) When a code bar extension is spacing the tab located on its underside lines up with the tab on the sensing lever. The tabs engage each other and the sensing lever is blocked from pivoting to its most counterclockwise position.
(i) When a code bar extension is in the mark position its tab is not in line with the sensing lever tab. As a result the sensing lever pivots to its most clockwise position.
(j) The feed punch sensing lever always travels to its most clockwise position since it has no tabs. This motion is presented to the pawl, lever and punch combination through a latching surface located on the pawl.
(k) When the perforator unit is in the stop position the pawl is in its most vertical position, the lever is in its most clockwise position and the code punch is in its most downward position or below the surface of the tape.
(l) When a sensing lever is in the space position its latching surface is prevented from engaging with the pawl's latching surface. As a result the pawl is not selected.
(m) When the sensing lever is in the mark position its latching surface engages the latching surface on the pawl. When the two latching surfaces engage, the pawl is in the selected position.
(n) As the power bail rotates clockwise the feed pawl slides along the inclined surface of the adjacent ratchet tooth, drops behind it and is cammed away from the ratchet wheel. Occuring simultaneously, the sensing levers in the mark position rotate counter-clockwise and transfer their motion to the selected pawl, lever and code punch combination. A point is reached where the drive bail transfers its motion to the spacing sensing levers. Since their pawl, lever and code combinations are in the non-select position no motion is transferred to them. This results as a blank in the tape since the code punch remains in its most downward position below the tapes surface. As the drive bail continues and reaches its most clockwise position the code punch of a selected pawl, lever and code punch combination travels upwards, perforates a hole in the tape and continues to its most vertical position. The feed hole is always perforated in the tape since its pawl and lever is always selected. Just prior to the end of the drive bails most clockwise position the stripper bail through its bias spring engages a latching surface located under the spring hook of the selected pawl.
(o) During the power bail's clockwise motion the tape nudger performs its function. Motion is transferred from acam profile located in one of the arms of the power bail through a post molded as an integral part of the nudger. The nudger rotates counter-clockwise, engages and nudges the tape gently when the selected code punches are engaged with the tape. This enables the tape roll to be indexed a small amount without affecting tape feed spacing since only the weight of the paper between the tape roll is reflected to the tape feed wheel when the tape is being advanced.
(p) As the power bail rotates counter-clockwise to its stop position the stripper bail strips the selected pawls from their sensing lever. The selected pawl, lever and code punch combinations return to their stop position through their bias springs and the retractor mechanism. The sensing lever bail of the power bail also acts as a part of the retractor mechanism. As the stripper strips the pawls a cam surface on the pawl which acts as the other member of the retractor mechanism engages the sensing lever bail post and cams the pawl upwards to the stop position. During this portion of the drive bail's travel the code bar extensions are reset by the printer's code bar reset bail.
(5) The tape guide assembly consists of a bracket, two rollers, three posts, a wheel and a compression spring held together by retainers. A tension spring biases the tape guide assembly in the clockwise direction. The knurled roller settles against the knurled feedwheel with a predetermined force. It is the combination of force and the knurled wheels that provide adequate tape spacing. The tape guide assembly is shaped in the form of a funnel to provide easy tape threading. A push button located in the cover lid when pushed down against a bent tab located on the bracket disengages the tape guide assembly from the feed wheelthereby providing easy tape removal from the perforator unit.
(6) The punch blockassembly consists of code punches, a feed punch, a holder, a die plate and a bias spring. The code punches and feed punch are oriented to the die plate through slots which engage levers in their respective code level, pawl, and lever combinations. The bias spring always biases the tape againstone edge of block. This results in the code hole and feed hole relation to the tape edge to be held constant.
(7) The back space lever when depressed manually to its most downward position back spaces the ratchet one tooth space. This results in the tape being back spaced one full character. The backspace lever through another lever cams out the feed pawl during the back space operation. This is a safety feature to prevent a jam if the operator accidentally operates the back space mechanism while the perforator unit is running.
b. Some applications may require that the answer-back code "upper case D" be converted to a "figures" code to prevent tripping of the answer-back when the tape is read by the transmitter. The perforator unit design includes the provision for adding an auxiliary drive bail for converting Upper Case "D", to the answer-back trip code combination, to "figures" by perforating additional holes in the tape.
(1) The auxiliary drive bail consists of two sensing levers, two pawls, two levers, and a shaft when assembled together, form an auxiliary drive bail that drives preselected code punch levers.
(2) Tabs pre-coded with the Figures "D" combination on the under side of the code bar extensions are sensed by the A-0 and the A-8 sensing levers. All code combinations except the Figures "D" code combination block the A-0 and A-8 sensing levers from reaching their most clockwise position.
(3) On sensing the upper case "D" code combination (0, 1 and 4code levels marking) the A-0 and the A-8 sensing levers impart motion to the auxiliary drive bail.
(4) To convert Figures "D" to Figures the No. 2 and No. 5 code punch levers have tabs located on their underside which line up with the shaft of the auxiliary drive bail.
(5) When the Figures "D" code combination is received by the perforator unit the No. 0, 1, and 4 sensing lever, pawl lever, and code punch combinations are actuated by the power bail through their sensing levers and the No. 2 and No. 5 code punches are actuated by the auxiliary drive bail through the tabs located on the underside of the No. 2 and No. 5 code punch levers. The resulting perforations in the tape is a "Figs" code combination.
(6) The auxiliary drive bail design to convert one code combination to another is based on adding perforations to the first code combination to get the desired code combination. The auxiliary drive bail can only add perforations in the tape, it cannot delete them.
c. The drive mechanism consists of a separate set of parts which when assembled together on the printer forms the perforator unit drive. The perforator unit drive bail receives its motion from the printer's function shaft through an arm, plate, and drive link.
(1) The plate is fastened to the arm which in turn is fastened to the function shaft.
(2) The drive link pivots from a post mounted in the plate and is biased in the clockwise direction by a tension spring.
(3) Located on the drive link's underside and at the end opposite the pivot is a "V" groove that engages the post located in the perforator unit power bail.
(4) There is a link with a post that is included in the setof drive parts. One end mounts through a spacer to the printer's platen mounting post and the post at the other end fits into a bushing located in the plate. Its purpose is to add rigidity to the printer's function shaft.
d. The on and off push-buttons are located in the perforator cover lid. A spider leaf spring held captive to the underside of the lid biases the push-buttons upwards. The underside of the push-buttons line up with the flat surfaces on a plastic lever that pivots from a post mounted to the perforator unit frame.
(1) Motion is transferred to an on-off control lever through a link, the plastic lever and the on-off push-buttons.
(2) When the "on" button is depressed the on-off control lever rotates to its most counter-clockwise position, the link to its most vertical position and the plastic lever to its most clockwise position.
(3) The "V' groove located in the on-off control lever profile disengages the perforator unit drive bail post. A roller located on the lever cams the drive link in the clockwise direction. The "V" groove on the drive link engages the power bail drive post while the "V" groove on the on-off control lever is partially disengaged. The interaction of the "V" grooves is designed so that either "V" groove controls the drive bail before the other becomes totally disengaged. The "V" groove on the on-off control lever is in its most counter-clockwise position completely clears the path of the power bail drive post while the roller is completely disengaged from the drive link.
(4) A detent lever biased in the counter-clockwise direction by atension spring holds the mechanism in its off position.
(5) The opposite action occurs when the "off" button is depressed. The on-off control lever is detented in its most clockwise direction, the link in its lowest vertical position and the plastic lever in its counter-clockwise position. The drive link is completely cammed out of the path of the power bail drive post by the roller on the on-off control lever. The on-off control lever always locks the drive bail in the stop position.
e. The ASA code has assigned R, on, Rj off code combinations to automatically start and stop the perforator unit on receipt of the code combinations. Provision has been made in the perforator unit to accept an additional mechanism to perform this function.
f. Provision has been made to automatically turn off the perforator unit when it receives an end of message (EOM) code combination.
